Title : insights-job-attachment-during-pandemic-february-2022.txt
Context:Chart 5 shows similar patterns for men and women during the pandemic . There are always more women who are not in the labour force with job attachment than men

Title : have-your-say-future-abs-geospatial-data.txt
Context:“ The ABS has always provided a considerable amount of local and regional socio economic data that is used

Title : technical-note-impact-using-multiple-sources-deriving-indigenous-status-deaths-2023-changes-victoria-and-coroner-referred-deaths.txt
Context:in coronial reports is not only more detailed but also because the data is not always available from the RBDMs at the time the registration is lodged with the ABS

Title : insights-job-attachment-during-pandemic-january-2022.txt
Context:Chart 5 shows similar patterns for men and women during the pandemic . There are always more women who are not in the labour force with job attachment than men

Title : development-new-experimental-monthly-household-spending-indicator.txt
Context:changes for a good or where a service is delivered , and this is not always at the point where payment is made . This is the primary conceptual difference

Title : australias-journey-work.txt
Context:2021 , declining from 8.4 % in 1976 .  
 While ‘ Bicycle ’ has always been a response option for the journey to work question , ‘ Walking ’

Title : modelling-indicative-state-level-industry-jobs-estimates-labour-account.txt
Context:persons differences for Victoria and Queensland . The national total for LFS employed persons will always be lower than the national total for the Labour Account methods due to scope

Title : independent-review-abs-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-life-expectancy-estimates.txt
Context:changes in identification . The panel advised that this risk can be best managed by always presenting change estimates in ways that openly recognise this possibility , and actively seek

Title : seasonal-adjustment-and-changing-seasonality-labour-force-statistics.txt
Context:they were sick or injured . Chart 9 and Chart 10 show that there are always some people working reduced hours , and that this often peaks around the winter
Context:changes over the past three years reflect an evolving seasonal pattern . 
 The ABS always seeks to   provides guidance and advice to users to assist in interpreting changes

Title : anzsco-maintenance-strategy-core-components.txt
Context:However , due to resource constraints and limited subject matter expertise , this may not always be possible . 
 Header 13 : Benefits 
 Header 13 : Risk 


Title : sexual-assault-perpetrators.txt
Context:sentence length or fine amount ( i.e. quantum ) . This is usually but not always the principal offence for the defendant . 
 The most serious sentence dealt to

Title : spotlight-seasonality-payroll-jobs-and-wages-paid-2022-year-end.txt
Context:The annual pattern always shows an increase in labour market activity before Christmas , around a seasonal peak

Title : digital-platform-workers-australia.txt
Context:While digital platform workers and their work have always been included within existing labour statistics on employment and hours , they are a
Context:it also shares common elements with older forms of short term employment , that have always existed . For example , a digital platform task offering short term passenger transport

Title : how-administrative-data-improved-quality-2021-census.txt
Context:we need to : 
 Results from the   showed us that we do n’t always get these decisions right , and we might think a house was occupied on

Title : spotlight-labour-account.txt
Context:and other estimates ( such as hours worked ) . The Labour Account estimate is always higher . 
 The Labour Account is our best source of industry employment data

