Title : insights-job-attachment-during-pandemic-february-2022.txt
Context:attachment was similar over the pandemic for men and women . 
 Younger workers have generally been more impacted by changes in employment and hours during the pandemic . Chart
Context:
 In January 2022 , the number of people out of employment with job attachment generally followed a seasonal pattern across the states and territories , though was slightly elevated

Title : deaths-due-covid-19-influenza-and-rsv-australia-2022-september-2024.txt
Context:than younger age groups .  
   As the most populous state , New South Wales generally records the highest numbers of deaths for acute respiratory infections .  
   Queensland has

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic-until-august-2023.txt
Context:or changed access to health care ) . For these reasons , excess mortality is generally considered a more comprehensive measure for assessing the impact of the pandemic rather than
Context:  was a key contributor to increased mortality during this time .   
   Mortality was generally in the expected range of variation during the first two years of the pandemic
Context:
   During the first two years of the pandemic ,   mortality in WA was generally within the expected range of variation . There was less than 1 % excess
Context:clear compared to 2022 . 
   Prior to September 2021 , mortality in Tasmania was generally in the expected range . Similar to other states , there was a period
Context:
   Since the end of April 2023 , mortality in the Australian Capital Territory has generally been below expected .   
   Mortality in all weeks except three   in the

Title : charts-casual-employment-occupation-industry-and-job-mobility-february-2023.txt
Context:and hours worked patterns during the pandemic . As of February 2023 , people have generally been able to work their normal hours without any major disruptions , such as

Title : insights-government-finance-statistics-june-2023.txt
Context:, particularly in the mining and resources sectors with elevated prices for energy commodities 
   generally strong economic conditions , combined with rising consumer inflation . 
   the exhaustion of

Title : domestic-violence-experiences-partner-emotional-abuse.txt
Context:, control , isolate or intimidate the person they are aimed at . They are generally repeated behaviours and include psychological , social , financial ( also known as economic
Context:, control , isolate or intimidate the person they are aimed at . They are generally repeated behaviours and include psychological , social , financial , and verbal abuse .

Title : technical-note-impact-using-multiple-sources-deriving-indigenous-status-deaths-2023-changes-victoria-and-coroner-referred-deaths.txt
Context:that have been implemented are :  
 Following these two methodological improvements the deceased is generally reported as being of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander origin when recorded as such
Context:status of deaths registered in Victoria was derived from information lodged by the informant ( generally the funeral director and family ) on the Death Registration Statement ( DRS )

Title : deaths-due-acute-respiratory-infections-australia-2022-march-2024.txt
Context:aged 80 89 years .  
   As the most populous state , New South Wales generally records the highest numbers of deaths for acute respiratory infections .  
   COVID 19

Title : characteristics-previous-australian-defence-force-personnel.txt
Context:composition . 
 For persons aged 15 64 , equivalised weekly household income levels were generally higher among previous service members than those who had never served . According to
Context:higher in the previously served population . 
 Equivalised weekly household income ( ) was generally higher among young previous ADF service members than people who had never served .
Context:served . 
 Personal income among those aged 25 44 who had previously served was generally higher for males than females . 
 People aged 25 44 who had previously

Title : cpi-international-comparisons.txt
Context:pandemic , annual inflation in the countries being compared was relatively low and stable , generally tracking below 3 per cent . From 2021 , the increase in inflation shown
Context:and a lack of reliable data remains a challenge for many countries . There are generally four common approaches to measuring OOH in the CPI , including those used by

Title : insights-job-attachment-during-pandemic-january-2022.txt
Context:attachment was similar over the pandemic for men and women . 
 Younger workers have generally been more impacted by changes in employment and hours during the pandemic . Chart
Context:
 In January 2022 , the number of people out of employment with job attachment generally followed a seasonal pattern across the states and territories , though was slightly elevated

Title : development-composite-indicator-business-digital-intensity-australia-digital-intensity-index.txt
Context:are given to variables of a question relative to the number of variables considered . Generally , relative weights have allocated an equal proportion to each variable . Exceptions were

Title : development-new-experimental-monthly-household-spending-indicator.txt
Context:education , electricity , gas , and other fuels , or communications where bills are generally paid before or after these services have been used . 
 Other conceptual differences

Title : monthly-international-trade-services-compilation-guide.txt
Context:and are lagged from the reference period . Monthly international trade in services statistics is generally nowcasted ( projected using historical data ) due to data availability . Nowcasted estimates

Title : autism-australia-2022.txt
Context:Survey of Disability , Ageing and Carers ( SDAC ) ,   autism prevalence has generally increased over time . There are several factors which may have contributed to this
Context:of females ) . However , the difference in autism prevalence for males and females generally decreased for older age groups .  
 In 2022 :  
   199,900 ( 1.6

Title : towards-national-ocean-account.txt
Context:global priorities . The accounts can inform on a range of ocean related policies and generally support the management of a healthy and resilient ocean , integrating biodiversity into planning

Title : understanding-labour-quality-and-its-contribution-productivity-measurement.txt
Context:of the workforce , the rate of growth of labour input measured by QALI is generally higher than the growth measured by hours worked . Consequently , productivity will grow

Title : restraint-clauses-australia-2023.txt
Context:clause . 
 The majority of businesses reported that their use of restraint clauses had generally remained the same over the past five years . However , across the clauses
Context:employers , with some high level information around prevalence within businesses ( which showed that generally , where clauses were used , they often applied to most or all employees

Title : covid-19-mortality-australia-deaths-registered-until-30-september-2023.txt
Context:as additional registrations are received by the ABS .  
 COVID 19 related deaths have generally been lower throughout 2023 than 2022 . 
 As of 30 September 2023 ,

Title : understanding-life-expectancy-estimates-2020-2022.txt
Context:calculating life expectancy . A detailed description of the method is provided in . 
 Generally , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander life expectancy estimates are not comparable over time

Title : introduction-digital-services-balance-payments.txt
Context:a multitude of ways and utilises complex corporate structures . For Australia , it is generally the case that the intellectual property ( which underpins the production of digital services

Title : recording-international-students-balance-payments.txt
Context:as their ‘ centre of predominant economic interest ’ [ 2 ] . This is generally based on significant economic activity and transactions within a country ’s economic territory ,
Context:explicitly deals with this case : “ People who go abroad for full time study generally continue to be resident in the territory in which they were resident prior to

Title : producing-official-statistics-linked-data-technical-report.txt
Context:businesses could still have a decrease in profitability in one isolated year due to a generally unfavourable business climate that year . As such , we choose to include such
Context:more regularly .  
 An extension of the above argument is that businesses with a generally low profitability should not be confused with other businesses due to one uncharacteristically good
Context:a firm is more likely to be in the lower profitability group if : 
 Generally these results are consistent with high level intuition – higher productivity in particular should
Context:Generally these results are consistent with high level intuition – higher productivity in particular should generally result in higher returns to factors of production ( labour and capital , with
Context:( outlined in Section 5.2 ) show some ability to discriminate between those businesses which generally do not increase their profit from year to year , and those which do
Context:a trained classifier applied to a dataset . Higher values for a test set are generally preferable , but a higher value that results from “ overfitting ” the classifier
Context:higher value that results from “ overfitting ” the classifier to the training set is generally undesirable .  
 The task is to assign each instance to one of two
Context:can be defined in various ways ) is adopted for further use .  
 The generally undesirable situation where a classifier performs very well on the training set , and

Title : spotlight-recent-trends-freight-costs.txt
Context:country to the border of the importing country . Air and sea freight services are generally owned and operated by non Australian residents , leading to Australia ’s imports of

Title : deaths-due-covid-19-influenza-and-rsv-australia-2022-may-2024.txt
Context:and influenza in 2023 .  
   As the most populous state , New South Wales generally records the highest numbers of deaths for acute respiratory infections ( for example ,

Title : interpreting-abs-productivity-statistics.txt
Context:an increase over time in the capital to labour ratio . Increased capital deepening is generally beneficial to economic growth since , on average , each unit of labour has
Context:of growth of labour input measured   on a Quality adjusted hours worked basis is generally higher than the growth measured   on an hours worked basis . Consequently ,

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic.txt
Context:and Australian Capital Territory recorded a higher than expected number of deaths , they were generally within the expected range . 
   Victoria has recorded the highest number of deaths
Context:Between the week beginning 4 October 2021 and the end of November 2021 mortality was generally lower than expected but still within the expected range .  
   COVID 19 mortality
Context: 
   Between June and November 2021 deaths due to chronic lower respiratory conditions   were generally lower than expected for a sustained period but still within the range of expectation
Context:these events should be interpreted with caution .  
   Between 2016 2019 cancer mortality has generally fallen between expected ranges . Intermittent points where the number of deaths has exceeded
Context:activity in the community .  
 
   Deaths from dementia during the COVID 19 pandemic were generally within expected ranges . The majority of observed deaths were below expected deaths in
Context:be interpreted with caution .  
   From May 2020 to October 2020 dementia mortality was generally below expected projections . In the weeks beginning 29 June 2020 and 13 July

Title : addressing-historical-coherence-experimental-two-year-innovation-rate.txt
Context:employment size presented stable growth . 
 At the industry level , the TYIR estimates generally presented similar characteristics to the SYIR . Some exceptions to this were : 


Title : population-movement-australia.txt
Context:. 
 Those who arrived in the NT from a different state or territory were generally younger than those who departed . Between 2016 and 2021 , the median age

Title : improvements-labour-force-estimation-method.txt
Context:participation rate , along with corresponding changes to the employed and unemployed estimates ( but generally making little difference to the unemployment rate ) . 
 The use of auxiliary
Context:around 58,000 people ) . 
 Revisions to the key measures will vary but will generally be relatively small at the national level . 
 The participation rate and employment
Context:the national level . 
 The participation rate and employment to population ratio will both generally be 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points lower since the start of the pandemic ,
Context:years prior to the pandemic . 
 Revisions to the unemployment and underemployment rates will generally not be discernible in rounded terms , and less than 0.1 percentage point .

Title : housing-cost-measures-national-accounts.txt
Context:HFCE rents are usually one of the most stable HFCE series in volume terms and generally align closely with quarterly growth in . 
 Rental prices have been the predominant

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic-until-first-quarter-2023.txt
Context:or changed access to health care ) . For these reasons , excess mortality is generally considered a more comprehensive measure for assessing the impact of the pandemic rather than
Context:first quarter of 2023 .  
   From mid February 2023 deaths in New South Wales generally fall into the expected range of variation , i.e. there was no statistically significant
Context:19 was a key contributor to increased mortality during this time .   
   Mortality was generally in the expected range of variation during the first two years of the pandemic
Context: 
   During the first two years of the pandemic ,   mortality in WA was generally within the expected range of variation . There was less than 1 % excess
Context:contributing to higher mortality .  
   Prior to September 2021 , mortality in Tasmania was generally in the expected range . Similar to other states , there was a period

Title : deaths-due-covid-19-influenza-and-rsv-australia-2022-july-2024.txt
Context:than younger age groups .  
   As the most populous state , New South Wales generally records the highest numbers of deaths for acute respiratory infections .  
   Queensland has

Title : analytical-measures-labour-costs.txt
Context:quarterly outcomes , the 10 year average of growth in average COE per employee is generally comparable to growth in the Wage Price Index ( WPI ) , especially prior

Title : seasonal-adjustment-and-changing-seasonality-labour-force-statistics.txt
Context:. This process is typically done around March or April for Labour Force statistics and generally only results in minor revisions , as can be seen in the . 

Context:.  
 When there is a discernible change in a seasonal pattern , it will generally be reflected in corresponding changes in the seasonal factors after three years , and
Context:when seasonal patterns in Labour Force statistics may look a little unusual , the ABS generally focuses on providing additional guidance and advice to users to help interpret the data
Context:guide to how to make sense of unusual data movements . The ABS will also generally couple this advice with supporting analysis of trend series and how changes align with

Title : long-term-health-conditions.txt
Context:the ‘ healthy migrant effect ’ ( i.e. health requirements and eligibility criteria ensuring that generally those in good health migrate to Australia ) . Although immigrants come from diverse

Title : guide-understanding-employee-earnings-and-hours-statistics-may-2021.txt
Context:the Non managerial employee population as it excludes those upper level managers whose pay are generally set by instruments other than Awards . Award and Collective agreement data is released
Context:employee setting the wage rates and conditions of employment on an individual basis . 
   Generally Individual arrangements offer a set of terms and conditions above relevant state or national

Title : frequently-asked-questions-faqs-about-consumer-price-index.txt
Context:reviewed and updated to ensure it continues to meet community needs . These reviews are generally timed with the results from the Household Expenditure Survey ( HES ) , which

Title : new-census-insights-income-australia-using-administrative-data.txt
Context:distribution of Total weekly incomes less than $ 1,000 . The distribution of incomes is generally smooth across the ranges , however there are two notable spikes : 
   There

Title : back-my-day-comparing-millennials-earlier-generations.txt
Context:in 2021 was significantly lower than in 2006 and 1991 , meaning that Millennials would generally have had lower interest rate mortgages than the earlier generations . 
 The most

Title : new-houses-being-built-smaller-blocks.txt
Context:year period , declining slowly from 271 to 254 square metres , while Greater Adelaide generally had the smallest ( growing slowly from 209 to 220 square metres ) ,

Title : australian-defence-force-service.txt
Context:While Reservists may live at any location across Australia , those in the Regular service generally reside on or near an ADF base in a private   such as their
Context:a household ( such as the family home ) . 
 Household income levels were generally higher among current service members than those who had never served . According to

Title : overseas-arrivals-and-departures-australia-2023-24-financial-year.txt
Context:( 42 % of June 2019 arrivals ) . 
 Visitor arrivals to Australia have generally been increasing over recent decades , with a continuous increase in the ten year

Title : mental-health-findings-lgbtq-australians.txt
Context:( 17.2 % ) . 
 Across a range of other measures , trans people generally had higher rates than cis people , more noticeably those in younger age groups

Title : religious-affiliation-australia.txt
Context:Southern Asia(1 ) . 
 Christian affiliation of people in Australia varied across generations . Generally , older generations were more likely to be affiliated with Christianity and younger generations

Title : measuring-owner-occupied-housing-consumer-price-index.txt
Context:. 
 The CPI is produced by National Statistical Offices across the world and is generally recognised as the principal measure of inflation experienced by households . 
 The CPI
Context:, annual CPI inflation in the countries being compared was relatively low and stable , generally tracking below 3 per cent . From 2021 , the increase in inflation represents
Context:measure OOH also determines the weight ( contribution ) in the CPI . Rental equivalence generally results in a higher weight in the CPI as all households , both new

Title : revisions-improvements-labour-force-estimation-method.txt
Context:participation rate , along with corresponding changes to the employed and unemployed estimates ( but generally making little difference to the unemployment rate ) . 
 The use of auxiliary
Context:( around 58,000 people ) . 
 Revisions to the key measures vary but are generally relatively small at the national level . Below are some graphs showing revisions to
Context:estimation method provides both a better level estimate for Northern Territory Labour Force statistics and generally   reduces the   average   month to month variability in the key indicators
Context:‘ level shift ’ from the previously published estimates to the improved estimates , but generally with a relatively consistent underlying pattern of increasing or decreasing changes over time .
Context:the latest available estimates , and not compare revised and unrevised data ( which would generally overstate the extent of change ) . 
 The improved estimation method and the

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic-until-december-2023.txt
Context:or changed access to health care ) . For these reasons , excess mortality is generally considered a more comprehensive measure for assessing the impact of the pandemic rather than
Context:  was a key contributor to increased mortality during this time .   
   Mortality was generally in the expected range of variation during the first two years of the pandemic
Context:
   During the first two years of the pandemic ,   mortality in WA was generally within the expected range of variation . There was less than 1 % excess
Context:40 % in 2023 .  
   Prior to September 2021 , mortality in Tasmania was generally in the expected range . Similar to other states , there was a period
Context:Between mid April and mid October 2023 , mortality in the Australian Capital Territory has generally been below expected .    Since mid October , mortality has generally been above
Context:Capital Territory has generally been below expected .    Since mid October , mortality has generally been above expected but within the expected range of variation . 
   Mortality fell

Title : sexual-assault-perpetrators.txt
Context:magistrate and has the jurisdiction to hear cases and sentence criminal charges against persons ( generally ) aged less than 18 years at the time the offence occurred . May

Title : spotlight-seasonality-payroll-jobs-and-wages-paid-2022-year-end.txt
Context:an ‘ original ’ data series and do not yet include seasonally adjusted data . Generally , three to five years of stable data are required before seasonal patterns can

Title : guide-using-historical-estimates-comparative-analysis-and-reporting.txt
Context:growth ( births , deaths and migration ) to the latest Census based estimate . Generally speaking , the accuracy of the Census and component data means that only minor
Context:collection and in the estimation / projection processes .  
 The 2021 based series can generally be used for any of the following scenarios : 
 Using a range of
Context:of rates being compared over time , if : the time series is short , generally no further back than the penultimate ( 2016 ) Censusthe numerator data are known
Context:issue in the data from earlier Censuses .  
   the time series is short , generally no further back than the penultimate ( 2016 ) Census 
   the numerator data
Context:That is , re weighting past surveys to the latest population estimate series is not generally recommended . 
   Analysis of Census data should be based on Census counts rather

Title : producing-official-statistics-linked-data.txt
Context:a firm is more likely to be in the lower profitability group if :  
 Generally , these results are consistent with high level intuition – higher productivity in particular
Context:, these results are consistent with high level intuition – higher productivity in particular should generally result in higher returns to factors of production ( labour and capital , with

Title : digital-platform-workers-australia.txt
Context:The framework acknowledges that the ‘ gig economy ’ is a broad term that is generally used to describe a wide range of activities , from buying and selling goods

Title : how-administrative-data-improved-quality-2021-census.txt
Context:Census . We predicted occupancy rates for these areas using administrative data and these rates generally matched the Census data , giving us confidence that the data was accurate .

