Title : pandemic-insights-australian-smokers-2020-21.txt
Context:   Men were more likely than women to smoke daily ( 12.6 % compared to 8.8 % ) 
  
Context:% compared to 8.8 % ) 
   Adults with fair or poor health were more likely to be current daily smokers ( 17.7 % ) 
 Tobacco smoking is one
Context:before dropping to 3.4 % at age 75 years and over 
   Men were more likely than women to smoke daily ( 12.6 % compared to 8.8 % ) 
  
Context:that they were current non smokers . 
 The characteristics of adults who were most likely to be current daily smokers in 2020 21 were : 
   Adults born in
Context:current daily smokers in 2020 21 were : 
   Adults born in Australia were more likely to be current daily smokers than those born overseas ( 12.2 % and 7.6
Context:and 7.6 % ) 
   Those who spoke English at home were almost twice as likely to be current daily smokers compared with those who spoke a language other than
Context:smokers 
   Adults living in areas of most disadvantage were more than three times as likely to be current daily smokers compared with adults living in areas of least disadvantage
Context:% ) 
   Adults living in outer regional and remote Australia were almost twice as likely to be current daily smokers compared with those living in major cities ( 17.9
Context:
   Adults who reported their health as fair or poor were more than twice as likely to be current daily smokers compared with those who reported their health as excellent
Context:) . This describes the distance from the population value that the sample estimate is likely to be within and is particularly useful to understand the accuracy of proportion estimates
Context:between unrelated characteristics or sub populations , it provides a reasonable approximation for the differences likely to be of interest in this publication .  
 When comparing estimates between surveys

Title : twenty-seven-years-prisoners-australia.txt
Context:an automatic reduction of fixed sentences by one third to offset other changes that were likely to increase the length of sentences . This provision was removed in 2008 .

Title : insights-government-finance-statistics-march-2024.txt
Context:% ( $ 0.6 billion ) through the year to March quarter 2024 and is likely to reflect growth in non government school payments and employment services . 
   Source

Title : insights-job-attachment-during-pandemic-february-2022.txt
Context:work and be available for work , but also that some people may be less likely to look for another job if they still have one ( or perceive that
Context:the labour force with job attachment than men , which partly reflects women being more likely to be on ( or returning from ) periods of extended unpaid leave (

Title : deaths-due-covid-19-influenza-and-rsv-australia-2022-september-2024.txt
Context:illness still contributed significantly to death ) . 
   COVID 19 and Influenza are more likely to be assigned as the underlying causes of death rather than a contributing factor
Context:with the virus ) . The opposite is true for RSV    it is more likely to be listed as a significant contributor to death . To wholly monitor the
Context:from influenza in 2024 . 
   All three of these acute respiratory infections are more likely to cause death in older age groups than younger age groups .  
   As

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic-until-august-2023.txt
Context:
   There was a large decline in mortality between 2017 and 2018 . This is likely due to the severe influenza season in 2017 causing some mortality displacement in 2018

Title : insights-government-finance-statistics-june-2023.txt
Context:the 32.1 % through the year rise in June quarter 2023 were : 
 Other likely contributors to the rise were : 
   higher company profitability , particularly in the
Context:the 15.5 % through the year rise in June quarter 2023 were : 
 Other likely contributors to the rise were capital gains , net rent , and interest earnings
Context:January 2023 . 
 Stamp duty on conveyances has increased from June quarter 2020 . Likely contributors to the recovery were : 
   increased clearance rates , residential sale volumes

Title : queensland-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:. 
 In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in Queensland were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report
Context:Queensland were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report having heart disease ( 3.9 % compared with 3.4 % of females

Title : australian-capital-territory-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in   the Australian Capital Territory were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having
Context:Capital Territory were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having heart disease ( 3.1 % compared with 2.2 % of females

Title : improved-measurement-household-consumption-food-national-accounts.txt
Context:the new estimates have been spliced into the September quarter 2021 . The differences are likely due to improved accuracy from more detailed product information in the supermarket scanner data

Title : domestic-violence-experiences-partner-emotional-abuse.txt
Context:
   Those who experienced abuse or witnessed parental violence as a child were twice as likely than those who did not to experience partner emotional abuse as an adult 
  
Context:emotional abuse since the age of 15 , including : 
 Women were about as likely as men to experience emotional abuse by a current partner ( 6.1 % compared
Context:by a current partner ( 6.1 % compared with 5.2 % ) but were more likely to have experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner ( 18 % compared with
Context:( 6.7 % ) and 45 to 54 years ( 6.5 % ) were more likely to experience abuse 
   65 years and over ( 2.2 % ) were less
Context:likely to experience abuse 
   65 years and over ( 2.2 % ) were less likely to experience abuse 
   30 to 44 years ( 6.7 % ) were more
Context:likely to experience abuse 
   30 to 44 years ( 6.7 % ) were more likely to experience abuse 
   65 years and over ( * 2.1 % ) were
Context:to experience abuse 
   65 years and over ( * 2.1 % ) were less likely to experience abuse 
 Women with disability or a long term health condition were
Context:to experience abuse 
 Women with disability or a long term health condition were more likely to experience partner emotional abuse ( 6.3 % ) than women without disability or
Context:women and men with disability , those with intellectual or psychological disability were the most likely to experience partner emotional abuse ( 12 % for women and 6.8 % for
Context:in a one parent family with children under 15 years were more than twice as likely to experience partner emotional abuse ( 14 % ) compared with women in all
Context:under 15 and men living in a couple family with children under 15 were more likely to experience emotional abuse ( 9.2 % and 6.4 % respectively ) compared with
Context:which experienced cash flow problems in the previous 12 months were more than twice as likely as those who did not experience cash flow problems to experience partner emotional abuse
Context:that were unable to raise $ 2000 within a week for something important were more likely to experience partner emotional abuse ( 7.6 % ) than women living in households
Context:473,000 men who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner : 
 Women were more likely than men to experience threatening or degrading behaviours ( 76 % compared with 56
Context:million men who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner : 
 Women were more likely than men to experience controlling social ( 63 % compared with 54 % )
Context:Of men who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner : 
 Women were more likely than men to experience three or four behaviours ( 18 % compared with *
Context:or four behaviours ( 18 % compared with * 11 % ) and were less likely to experience one behaviour ( 45 % compared with 57 % ) . 
  
Context:Of men who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner : 
 Women were more likely than men to experience ten or more behaviours ( 20 % compared with 8.7
Context:ten or more behaviours ( 20 % compared with 8.7 % ) and were less likely to experience one behaviour ( 18 % compared with 25 % ) . 
  
Context:abuse by a current partner , abuse was commonly experienced : 
 Men were more likely than women to experience emotional abuse once only ( 34 % compared with 15
Context:abuse by a previous partner , abuse was commonly experienced : 
 Women were more likely than men to experience emotional abuse most of the time or all of the
Context:) 
   a little of the time ( 26 % ) 
 Women were more likely than men to experience anxiety or fear due to emotional abuse , either by
Context:who experienced physical and/or sexual abuse before the age of 15 were around twice as likely as those who did not experience childhood abuse to experience partner emotional abuse as
Context:) , women who experienced both physical and sexual abuse in childhood were the most likely to experience partner emotional abuse as an adult ( 57 % ) . 

Context:towards a parent by a partner before the age of 15 were around twice as likely than those who did not witness violence to experience partner emotional abuse as an
Context:emotional abuse , those who have experienced partner emotional abuse were over 8 times more likely to have also experienced partner violence , either by the same emotionally abusive partner
Context:experienced emotional abuse , women who experienced partner emotional abuse were about 16 times more likely to have also experienced partner sexual violence ( 19 % compared with 1.2 %
Context:high . 
 Women and men who experienced partner emotional abuse were about twice as likely as those who did not experience partner emotional abuse to rate their overall life
Context:There were no notable differences in self assessed health status for men . 
   more likely to assess their health as poor or fair ( 20 % ) than women
Context:than women who had not experienced partner emotional abuse ( 14 % ) 
   less likely to rate health as very good or excellent ( 54 % ) than women

Title : technical-note-impact-using-multiple-sources-deriving-indigenous-status-deaths-2023-changes-victoria-and-coroner-referred-deaths.txt
Context:49 were doctor certified .  
   Deaths referred to a coroner have traditionally been more likely to have an Indigenous status of “ not stated ” on the DRS .
Context:: 
 The increase in median age of death for males and all persons is likely due to the higher proportion of natural causes of death in those identified as
Context:compared to the deaths of females ( 57.1 % ) . Such deaths are more likely to be due to natural causes , which typically occur in older age cohorts

Title : deaths-due-acute-respiratory-infections-australia-2022-march-2024.txt
Context:from influenza in 2024 . 
   All three of these acute respiratory infections are more likely to cause death in older age groups than younger age groups . For males

Title : pharmaceutical-benefits-scheme-supplied-medications.txt
Context:with at least one PBS medication . In 2020 21 : 
   Females were more likely to be supplied with medications than males ( 70.0 % compared to 56.6 %
Context:% of people aged 75 years and over 
   People with a disability were more likely to be supplied a medication than those with no disability ( 81.1 % compared
Context:% living in major cities 
   People living in areas of most disadvantage were more likely to be supplied with five or more medication types than people living in areas
Context:supplied . Other commonly supplied medication types included : 
 Females were six times more likely than males to be supplied with a Genito urinary system and sex hormones medication
Context:and sex hormones medication ( 15.0 % compared to 2.5 % ) , and more likely than males to be supplied with a Nervous system medication ( 28.2 % compared
Context:of people had one or more selected chronic conditions[4 ] . These people were more likely than those without a chronic condition to be supplied with a PBS medication (
Context:24.7 % with one chronic condition . 
 As people age , they are more likely to have more than one condition at the same time and take multiple medications[6

Title : characteristics-previous-australian-defence-force-personnel.txt
Context:)   than any other state 
   Previous service members aged 15 64 were more likely than those who had never served to be engaged in full time employment (
Context:43.9 % respectively ) 
   Previous service members ( 15.2 % ) were twice as likely to report working 50 or more hours in the week before Census   compared
Context:those who had never served ( 8.9 % ) 
   Previous service members were most likely to work in the Public Administration and Safety industry after leaving the ADF (
Context:) aged under 35 years . Those who previously served in the ADF were more likely to be older , with over half ( 53 % ) aged 65 years
Context:institutions such as universities or TAFE . 
 People with post school education are more likely to have better employment outcomes than those with lower educational attainment [ 3 ]
Context:served ( 24.1 % compared to 27.9 % respectively ) , suggesting they are more likely to go on to higher education after school . 
 A higher proportion of
Context:who had never served .  
 Previous Regular service members aged 25 64 were more likely than previous Reserve service members in that age group , and those who had
Context:members ( 11.8 % ) . While those who had never served were the most likely to have a bachelor degree , previous Reserve service members were most likely than
Context:the most likely to have a bachelor degree , previous Reserve service members were most likely than any other group to have a graduate diploma or post graduate degree .
Context:post graduate degree . 
 Males aged 25 64 who had previously served were more likely to obtain a certificate , diploma or advanced diploma as their highest level of
Context:. 
 As a total population , previous service members aged 25 64 are less likely to have obtained a bachelor degree and above than those who have never served
Context:previously served Regular and Reserves service members separately , previous Reserves service members were as likely as people who had never served to obtain a bachelor degree and higher (
Context:compared to 35.8 % respectively ) . 
 Females who had previously served were more likely than males who had previously served to obtain a bachelor degree or higher (
Context:% ) . Females who had previously served in the Reserves service were the most likely to obtain a bachelor degree or higher ( 42.4 % ) compared to females
Context:( 39.6 % ) . 
 Previously served people aged 25 64 were twice as likely to have a qualification in Engineering and Related Technologies ( 25.1 % ) than
Context:% ) than those who never served ( 13.8 % ) , however were less likely to have qualifications in Management and Commerce , Health or Education . 
 Of
Context:persons aged 25 64 were : 
 Previous service members were almost six times more likely to have an Aerospace Engineering and Technology qualification compared to those who have never
Context:had never served ( 26.4 % ) . 
 Previously served males were also more likely to have qualifications in Society and Culture ( 13.1 % ) than males who
Context:9.1 % of males ) . 
 Males who previously served were seven times more likely to have an Engineering and Related Technologies qualification ( 30.1 % ) compared with
Context:have never served ( 73.7 % ) . However , previous service members were more likely than those who had never served to be engaged in full time employment (
Context:engaged in full time employment ( 56.0 % and 43.9 % respectively ) and less likely to be employed part time ( 13.7 % compared to 23.9 % ) .
Context:part time ( 13.7 % compared to 23.9 % ) . They were also less likely to be unemployed ( 3.2 % compared to 4.1 % ) than those who
Context:proportion of previous service members that are male , as they tend to be more likely to work full time than females . Looking at males only , the previous
Context:than females . Looking at males only , the previous service members are still more likely to work full time than those who have never served ( 59.3 % and
Context:) . 
 While females aged 15 64 who had previously served were just as likely to be employed as females who had never served ( 71.2 % and 71.0
Context:who had never served ( 71.2 % and 71.0 % respectively ) they were more likely to work full time ( 41.4 % and 33.9 % respectively ) . Correspondingly
Context:( 41.4 % and 33.9 % respectively ) . Correspondingly , they were also less likely to be employed part time ( 24.4 % and 30.8 % respectively ) or
Context:in the ADF . 
 Previous service members ( 15.2 % ) were twice as likely to report working 50 or more hours that week compared to those who had
Context:who had never served ( 8.9 % ) . Previous Reserves service members were more likely to work 50 or more hours per week compared to Regular service members (
Context:explained by the higher proportion of previous service members being male ( who are more likely to work longer hours than females ) . However , when looking at males
Context:at males and females aged 15 64 separately , previous service members were still more likely to work 50 or more hours per week compared with those who had never
Context:most common occupations they were in were : 
 Those who previously served were more likely to be in Machinery Operating occupations ( 10.2 % ) than those who had
Context:who had never served ( 6.2 % ) . However , they were half as likely ( 3.9 % ) to be in Sales Worker occupations than those who had
Context:% of those who never served ) . 
 Previous Regular service members were more likely to be Technicians and Trade workers compared to previous Reserves service members ( 16.2
Context:and 13.1 % respectively ) . In contrast , previous Reserves service members were more likely to be Professionals ( 26.3 % ) than previous Regular service members ( 19.9
Context:( 19.9 % ) . 
 Males who had previously served were almost twice as likely to work in Community and Personal Service occupations ( 11.9 % ) than males
Context:who had never served ( 6.2 % ) . In contrast , they were less likely to work as Labourers than males who had never served ( 6.9 % compared
Context:11.5 % respectively ) . 
 Females who had previously served were 1.5 times more likely to work in Machinery Operating and Driving occupations than females who had never served
Context:( 2.5 % compared to 1.6 % respectively ) . They were about half as likely to work as Labourers than females who had never served ( 3.9 % compared
Context:sector may continue . 
 Males who had previously served were around three times as likely to work in Public Administration and Safety than males who had never served (
Context:was observed for females who had previously served , who were almost three times as likely to work in Public Administration and Safety than females who had never served (
Context:. 
 People aged 25 44 who had previously served in the ADF were more likely to be involved in their communities through volunteering than people who have never served
Context:those who had never served . 
 Young females who had previously served were more likely to have volunteered than males , regardless of their type of service . Almost

Title : people-disability-household-impacts-covid-19.txt
Context:, physical ( 42 % ) and other disabilities ( 54 % ) were more likely to report having received at least one dose of a COVID 19 vaccination than
Context:. 
 People with a sensory and speech disability ( 85 % ) were more likely to agree or strongly agree that they would get a COVID 19 vaccine when
Context:the main reason why they would not get one . People with disability were most likely to report concerns relating to potential side effects as the main reason not to
Context:to those without disability ( 56 % ) . 
   people with disability were more likely to rely on their General Practitioner ( GP ) or other health professional (
Context:( 20 % ) . 
   people with disability ( 15 % ) were less likely to consider the vaccine ’s use for a long time without serious side effects
Context:a five point scale ranging from excellent to poor . People with disability were less likely to assess their physical health as excellent or very good ( 29 % )
Context:a shortage of money . 
 People with disability ( 12 % ) were more likely than people with no disability ( 7 % ) to report their household was
Context:three months . People with intellectual disabilities ( 31 % * ) were the most likely to report experiencing this difficulty . 
 The majority ( 91 % ) of
Context:in the next three months . People with disability ( 87 % ) were less likely to report expecting their household would be able to pay bills received in the

Title : insights-job-attachment-during-pandemic-january-2022.txt
Context:work and be available for work , but also that some people may be less likely to look for another job if they still have one ( or perceive that
Context:the labour force with job attachment than men , which partly reflects women being more likely to be on ( or returning from ) periods of extended unpaid leave (

Title : development-composite-indicator-business-digital-intensity-australia-digital-intensity-index.txt
Context:the Information media and telecommunications industry , the publishing and internet providing businesses were most likely to be more digitally intense . 
 For Mining , coal mining and metal
Context:digitally intense . 
 For Mining , coal mining and metal ore businesses were most likely to be more digitally intense compared to quarrying businesses . 
 Please refer to

Title : insights-australian-smokers-2021-22.txt
Context:   Young people were less likely to be current daily smokers ( 7.1 % ) than in 2011 12 (
Context:2011 12 ( 16.5 % ) 
   People in areas of most disadvantage were more likely to be current daily smokers ( 16.1 % ) than those in areas of
Context:were current daily smokers ( 10.1 % or 1.9 million ) 
   Men were more likely than women to be current daily smokers ( 12.0 % compared to 8.2 %
Context:it peaked at 13.6 % 
   Older adults aged 75 years and over were less likely than any other adult age groups to be current daily smokers ( 3.0 %
Context:from 94.2 % in 2011 12 . 
 The characteristics of adults who were most likely to be current daily smokers in 2021 22 were : 
 People who lived
Context:
 People who lived in areas of most disadvantage were more than three times as likely to be current daily smokers than those in areas of least disadvantage ( 16.1
Context:12 to 16.1 % in 2021 22 . 
   Adults born in Australia were more likely to be current daily smokers than those born overseas ( 11.1 % compared to
Context:% compared to 8.1 % ) 
   Those who speak English at home were more likely to be current daily smokers than those who speak a language other than English
Context:current daily smokers 
   Adults who live in outer regional and remote Australia were more likely to be current daily smokers than those who live in major cities ( 15.7
Context:
   Those who reported their health as fair / poor were more than twice as likely to be current daily smokers than those who reported their health as excellent /
Context:) . This describes the distance from the population value that the sample estimate is likely to be within and is particularly useful to understand the accuracy of proportion estimates
Context:between unrelated characteristics or sub populations , it provides a reasonable approximation for the differences likely to be of interest in this publication .  
 When comparing estimates between surveys

Title : autism-australia-2022.txt
Context:‘ ’ section of this article . In 2022 , males were over twice as likely to be autistic than females . This is a decrease from 2018 , where
Context:. This is a decrease from 2018 , where males were over three times as likely to be autistic than females .  
 In 2022 :  
 The number of
Context:in 2018 ) .  
   males aged 5 14 years were almost three times as likely to be autistic than females aged 5 14 years ( 6.1 % for males
Context:% for females )  
   males aged 15 24 years were more than twice as likely to be autistic than females aged 15 24 ( 4.0 % for males compared
Context:households :  
 These rates are similar to 2018 .  
 Autistic people are less likely than others to complete an educational qualification beyond school and have needs for support
Context:27.0 % of persons without disability 
   Autistic females ( 32.9 % ) were more likely than Autistic males ( 13.8 % ) to have attained an educational qualification higher
Context:limitation , restriction or impairment which restricts everyday activities and has lasted , or is likely to last , for six months or more . 
 In 2022 , 8.9
Context:limitation , restriction or impairment which restricts everyday activities and has lasted , or is likely to last , for six months or more .   These questions are used
Context:) . Autistic females may present differently to Autistic males . Autistic females are more likely to engage in camouflaging behaviours than Autistic males ( ) . Camouflaging behaviours imitate

Title : seasonality-spotlight-2021-year-end.txt
Context:where employees are working more hours or being paid penalty rates , wages seasonality is likely to be greater than that seen in payroll jobs , such as in November

Title : understanding-labour-quality-and-its-contribution-productivity-measurement.txt
Context:tendency to employ more experienced workers has contributed positively to the labour quality and is likely to boost productivity growth over time . 
 The shift towards employing university level

Title : restraint-clauses-australia-2023.txt
Context:to derive proportions according to each restraint clause , with Non disclosure clauses the most likely to be used in the future ( 41.2 % of businesses indicated ‘ very
Context:likely to be used in the future ( 41.2 % of businesses indicated ‘ very likely ’ and 14.4 % indicated ‘ somewhat likely ’ ) .  
 Expected future
Context:41.2 % of businesses indicated ‘ very likely ’ and 14.4 % indicated ‘ somewhat likely ’ ) .  
 Expected future use was strongly correlated with an employer ’s
Context:. 
 If a business was currently using a clause type , it was highly likely they expected to continue to use it in the future . 77.1 % of
Context:the future . 77.1 % of businesses that used Non disclosure clauses were ' very likely ' to use them in future , and that proportion was also high ,
Context: 
 If a business was not currently using a clause type , it was less likely that they expected to use it in the future . 
 45.6 % of

Title : understanding-life-expectancy-estimates-2020-2022.txt
Context:. Changes in life expectancy estimates for areas with smaller non demographic changes are more likely to result from changes in population health . 
 Data on deaths are provided
Context:) to identify an Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander death . While it is considered likely that most deaths of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people are registered , a

Title : western-australia-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:
 In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in Western Australia were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report
Context:Australia were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report having no long term health condition ( 59.8 % compared with 58.9

Title : australia-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:found in . 
 In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having
Context:Islander females were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having heart disease ( 3.9 % compared with 3.5 % of females

Title : producing-official-statistics-linked-data-technical-report.txt
Context:between groups for single features . For example , the TP group is far more likely to have compjobs_bcs2 =3 than any other group .   
 Informed by plots such
Context:‘ low profitability ’ result . 
 Grouping like features , a firm is more likely to be in the lower profitability group if : 
 Generally these results are
Context:downstream feature lostcl_bcs ( “ Loss of one of these clients , etc    most likely impact ( Tick one box only ) ” ) is assigned the 88888888 code

Title : deriving-non-indigenous-population-estimates.txt
Context:is , it is not measured data ) . 
   Non Indigenous population is more likely to change demographically ( through fluctuations in net overseas migration ( NOM ) )

Title : deaths-due-covid-19-influenza-and-rsv-australia-2022-may-2024.txt
Context:illness still contributed significantly to death ) . 
   COVID 19 and Influenza are more likely to be assigned as the underlying causes of death rather than a contributing factor
Context:with the virus ) . The opposite is true for RSV    it is more likely to be listed as a significant contributor to death . To wholly monitor the
Context:in 2022 and 2023 . 
   All three of these acute respiratory infections are more likely to cause death in older age groups than younger age groups . For males

Title : interpreting-abs-productivity-statistics.txt
Context:For example , in Accommodation and food services , modelled capital services⁶   growth was likely overstated ( reflecting unused or underutilised capital ) during the COVID 19 restrictions ,
Context:on Jobkeeper would have reported working less hours . Consequently , modelled capital services were likely to be understated in the recovery period ( when the restrictions were lifted).⁷ 

Context:last five years provides some useful context ( Table 1 ) . 
 There are likely a multitude of reasons why the strong hours worked growth of 6.9 per cent
Context:20 hours overtime to complete an urgent task . The additional 20 hours worked are likely to be of lesser quality , even though they are more ‘ valuable ’

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic.txt
Context:excess deaths recorded due to dementia in 2017 during the winter months . This was likely related to the severe influenza season recorded in 2017 .  
 The analysis of

Title : characteristics-spotlight-2022.txt
Context:and Agriculture , forestry and fishing ) and based on Labour Force data are more likely to be male .  
 Reference weeks presented in this article refer to the
Context:with unknown sex than other age groups . Jobholders in this age group are more likely to be new income tax registrants and hence missing from the current snapshot (

Title : aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-peoples-experiencing-homelessness.txt
Context:common in older age groups . People aged 45 to 54 years were the most likely to be in this homeless operational group ( 21.3 % ) . 
 Females
Context:in 2021 , down from 360 in 2016 . In 2021 , females were more likely than males to be : 
 Males had a homelessness rate of 305 people
Context:in 2021 , down from 362 in 2016 . In 2021 , males were more likely than females to be : 
   living in ‘ severely ’ crowded dwellings (

Title : population-movement-australia.txt
Context:, which was consistent with previous censuses . In 2021 , people were slightly more likely to have moved elsewhere in Australia than compared to the five years prior to
Context:as their children grow up . Between 2016 and 2021 , internal movers were more likely to rent at their current usual residence than non movers ( 45.2 % compared
Context:non movers ( 45.2 % compared to 14.7 % ) . Non movers were more likely to live in houses that were owned outright or owned with a mortgage than
Context:migration data from the 2016 Census    those who moved elsewhere in Australia were more likely to rent than those who did not move ( 45.2 % compared to 13.8
Context:not move ( 45.2 % compared to 13.8 % ) while non movers were more likely to own their home , either outright or with a mortgage , than those
Context:moved ( 82.9 % compared to 51.4 % ) . 
 Internal movers were more likely to be in the labour force than non movers . Of people aged 15
Context:were in the labour force . 
 People working in some occupations were much more likely to move address . Occupations in the Defence Force had the highest proportion of
Context:people who had moved within the last five years . The occupations that were most likely not to have moved were farmers . 
 Families with young children are an
Context:
 Families with dependent students ( aged 15 to 24 years ) were far less likely to move residence ; only 5.8 % of families that moved lived with children
Context:years compared to 34 years for departures . 
 Arrivals to the NT were more likely to be in the labour force ( 85.3 % ) than those departing (
Context:. People who lived at the same address as five years ago were much less likely to be in the labour force ( 64.2 % ) than those arriving and

Title : south-australia-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:
 In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in South Australia were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report
Context:Australia were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report having heart disease ( 4.0 % compared with 3.6 % of females

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic-until-first-quarter-2023.txt
Context:compared to the first quarter of 2022 ( 6.3 % ) . This is most likely related to the later opening of borders for travellers to   WA which led
Context:in 2022 where mortality was above what was expected for sustained periods , indicating some likely excess mortality . For most of the pandemic , mortality in the NT has
Context:
   There was a large decline in mortality between 2017 and 2018 . This is likely due to the severe influenza season in 2017 causing some mortality displacement in 2018

Title : deaths-due-covid-19-influenza-and-rsv-australia-2022-july-2024.txt
Context:illness still contributed significantly to death ) . 
   COVID 19 and Influenza are more likely to be assigned as the underlying causes of death rather than a contributing factor
Context:with the virus ) . The opposite is true for RSV    it is more likely to be listed as a significant contributor to death . To wholly monitor the
Context:in 2022 and 2023 . 
   All three of these acute respiratory infections are more likely to cause death in older age groups than younger age groups .  
   As

Title : australias-journey-work.txt
Context:increase of over 2 million people since the 2016 Census . 
 This increase was likely due to the COVID 19 pandemic restrictions limiting people ’s ability to attend their
Context:driving themselves to work in 2021 declined to its lowest point in 40 years , likely due to the COVID 19 pandemic and people working from home rather than driving

Title : modelling-indicative-state-level-industry-jobs-estimates-labour-account.txt
Context:and Statistics Act 1905 , results have been confidentialised to ensure that they are not likely to enable identification of a particular person or organisation . 
 As the national

Title : independent-review-abs-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-life-expectancy-estimates.txt
Context:Strait Islander life expectancy . Further , the panel noted that the national headline estimates likely allow adequate measurement of life expectancy differences between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and
Context:found that the introduction of an adjustment to take age specific identification rates into account likely improved national estimates , while it also highlighted biases in some existing ( not

Title : victoria-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:. 
 In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in Victoria were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report
Context:Victoria were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report having dementia ( 0.5 % compared with 0.4 % of females )
Context:( 4.0 % compared with 3.3 % of females ) . Males were also more likely to report having no long term health condition ( 54.4 % compared with 50.4

Title : profile-people-core-need-assistance-australia.txt
Context:In 2021 those aged 3 years and over with a need for assistance were less likely to be attending an educational institution than those without a need for assistance (
Context:geographic distribution . It also allows us to identify small sub populations that are more likely to need assistance . For detailed information on all ABS sources of disability data
Context:looking at need for assistance by sex across the lifespan . Young males were more likely to have a need for assistance than young females in the first half of
Context:particularly between the ages of 5 24 years . Conversely , older females were more likely to have a need for assistance than males in the second half of the
Context:6.7 % in 2016 . Overall , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander males were more likely to report a need for assistance ( 8.7 % ) compared with Aboriginal and
Context:aged 65 years or more . 
 People living in Greater Capital Cities were less likely to have a need for assistance ( 5.4 % ) compared with those living
Context:, those aged 3 years and over , with a need for assistance were less likely to be attending an educational institution than those without a need for assistance (
Context:in 2021 . People without a need for assistance in this age group were more likely to be attending an educational institution in 2021 ( 33.7 % in 2006 compared
Context:Among those aged 25 29 years , people with a need for assistance were equally likely to attend   an educational institution in both 2006 and 2021 ( 13.0 %
Context:13.0 % in both years ) . People without a need for assistance were more likely to be attending an educational institution in 2021 ( 14.5 % in 2006 compared

Title : seasonal-adjustment-and-changing-seasonality-labour-force-statistics.txt
Context:the seasonally adjusted data . During this time , the relative slowness of trend is likely to be less of an issue than the time it takes to get close
Context:are much less stable and systematic , and this variation may mean they are more likely to be reflected in the irregular component of the time series , more than

Title : how-australian-generations-spent-their-time-recreation-and-leisure.txt
Context:non essential services , limits on gatherings and social distancing rules . 
 These restrictions likely affected free time and leisure activities in different ways . Changes in work from

Title : long-term-health-conditions.txt
Context:85 years and over had a long term health condition . 
 Females were more likely to have long term health conditions than males , which could also be influenced
Context:years , median age of males was 37 years ) . They were also more likely to have multiple conditions : 
 Older people were more likely to have multiple
Context:They were also more likely to have multiple conditions : 
 Older people were more likely to have multiple long term health conditions compared to younger people . 11.6 %
Context:the selected long term health conditions varied between males and females . Females were more likely than males to have conditions such as arthritis , a mental health condition and
Context:such as arthritis , a mental health condition and dementia , while males were more likely than females to have conditions such as heart disease , diabetes and stroke .
Context:Australians , and 23.4 % of those living in the Northern Territory . This is likely a reflection of the age profiles of these states and territories ( the median
Context:, people living outside Greater Capital Cities in the Rest of State areas were more likely to have a long term health condition than those living in Greater Capital Cities
Context:long term health condition . 
 People living in non private dwellings were also more likely to have multiple long term health conditions than those living in private dwellings :
Context:compared to 29.4 % of those living in other types of households . This is likely a reflection of the age profile of the different types of households . People
Context:people living in group households . 
 People living in lone person households were more likely to have multiple long term health conditions than those living in other types households
Context:Excluding asthma and any other long term health condition(s ) , they were twice as likely to report most long term conditions compared with people living in family and group
Context:( 45.5 % ) and Germany ( 44.9 % ) . 
 These proportions are likely to be impacted by the age profiles of the populations born in these countries
Context:years . 
 People in Australia who were born in Italy and Greece were most likely to have multiple long term health conditions . 
 Rates of long term health
Context:all , compared to those who spoke English very well or well . This is likely driven by age with the median of all people who use another language at

Title : new-south-wales-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in New South Wales were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having
Context:South Wales were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having heart disease ( 3.9 % compared with 3.2 % of females

Title : modelled-state-and-territory-jobs-and-hours-worked-estimates-industry.txt
Context:and Statistics Act 1905 , results have been confidentialised to ensure that they are not likely to enable identification of a particular person or organisation . 
 Header 4 :

Title : same-sex-couples-living-together-australia.txt
Context:30.8%[2 ] . This was the largest decrease ever observed by the ABS and was likely driven by COVID 19 restrictions on weddings that capped the number of guests and
Context:effect four years before the Census . 
 Females in same sex couples were more likely to be married than males in same sex couples , with nearly one third
Context:to decline from 37.8 % to 34.2 % . 
 Same sex couples were most likely to live in capital cities compared to the rest of each state . Male
Context:in capital cities compared to the rest of each state . Male couples were more likely to live in capital cities than female couples , except for Tasmania ( Tas
Context:an increase from 14.8 % in 2016 . 
 Female same sex couples were more likely to have children ( 27.7 % ) compared to male same sex couples (
Context:) for people in all couples . 
 People in same sex couples were less likely to use a language other than English at home ( 18.4 % ) compared
Context:2021 . 
 Across all age groups , people in same sex couples were more likely to report no religion than people in all couples . Three quarters of people

Title : guide-understanding-employee-earnings-and-hours-statistics-may-2021.txt
Context:are strongly encouraged to use statistical techniques to infer whether or not a difference is likely to be real or a reflection of sampling variation . 
 The sampling error

Title : new-census-insights-income-australia-using-administrative-data.txt
Context:as superannuation data is under recorded in the administrative data , therefore total incomes are likely to be under recorded in administrative data . For further information see . 

Context:Persons under 65 years are ineligible for the Age Pension while older persons were less likely to receive other types as they leave the workforce . 
 There are also
Context:have lower educational attainment 
   have higher prevalence of renting their home 
   are more likely to live alone 
   have lower socio economic advantage . 
 Nearly half of
Context:pensioners ) . 
   Non pensioners aged 65 years and older were 2.5 times more likely to have a bachelor ’s degree or higher ( 25.6 % compared with 10.3
Context:25.6 % compared with 10.3 % ) . 
   Age pensioners were nearly twice as likely not to have completed Year 10 ( 28.4 % compared with 16.1 % )
Context:% ) compared to non pensioners ( 22.7 % ) . Non pensioners were more likely to live in two person households ( 57.7 % ) compared to age pensioners

Title : back-my-day-comparing-millennials-earlier-generations.txt
Context:2006 Census when Generation X were at the same age , they were slightly more likely to live as a couple family ( 58.8 % ) . For Baby Boomers
Context:olds lived in a couple family ( 66.1 % ) . 
 Millennials were least likely to have married or had children compared with Generation X and Baby Boomers back
Context:than half of the Baby Boomers ( 51.5 % ) . Millennials were twice as likely to live with an unrelated person ( 2.4 % ) than Baby Boomers or
Context:. 
 While household sizes were smaller on average for Millennials , dwellings were more likely to have more bedrooms . In 2021 , 34.6 % of Millennials ’ dwellings
Context:, and 20.4 % for Baby Boomers in 1991 . 
 Millennials were also more likely to have two or more motor vehicles at their dwellings ( 58.9 % )
Context:thirds ( 65.8 % ) of Baby Boomers in 1991 . Millennials were the least likely to own their home outright . Baby Boomers at aged 25 39 years were
Context:their home outright . Baby Boomers at aged 25 39 years were three times more likely than Millennials to own their home without a mortgage . 
 As a proportion
Context:all generations when aged 25 39 years was separate houses , however Millennials were less likely to live in this type of housing in 2021 than Generation X in 2006
Context:2006 and Baby Boomers in 1991 . 
 25 39 year old Millennials were more likely than the previous generations to be studying at TAFE , university , or other
Context:with male students outnumbering females . 
 Although 25 39 year old students were more likely to be studying part time for all generations , Millennials were most likely to
Context:were more likely to be studying part time for all generations , Millennials were most likely to be full time students ( 45.2 % ) , followed by Generation X
Context:non school qualifications increased . While male Baby Boomers and male Generation X were more likely than females to have qualifications , for Millennials , females were more likely to
Context:were more likely than females to have qualifications , for Millennials , females were more likely to have these qualifications ( 81.7 % , compared with 76.7 % males )
Context:have had in the past ,   females of child bearing age were increasingly less likely to leave the workforce . 
 For females , Millennials were more likely than
Context:increasingly less likely to leave the workforce . 
 For females , Millennials were more likely than earlier generations to be in the labour force . For the one in
Context:in 2006 , and 4.6 % of Baby Boomers in 1991 . The difference was likely enhanced by the COVID 19 pandemic restrictions experienced by the 25 39 year old
Context:with one quarter of Baby Boomers ( 25.3 % ) . While females were more likely than males to work part time hours for all generations , males were increasingly
Context:generations , males were increasingly working fewer hours . Millennial males were almost twice as likely as Baby Boomer males to work part time hours . 
   Historical development of

Title : new-houses-being-built-smaller-blocks.txt
Context:house ; 
   houses where the approval value per square metre is unrealistic , most likely because the floor area provided on the building approval record was inaccurate ; and

Title : australian-defence-force-service.txt
Context:long term health condition . 
   People who had served in the ADF were more likely to have volunteered in the previous 12 months ( 21 % ) than those
Context:aged under 35 years . 
 Those who previously served in the ADF were more likely to be older , with over half ( 53 % ) aged 65 years
Context:ACT ( 2,050 people , accounting for 2.4 % of Gungahlin ’s population ) , likely due to its proximity to Duntroon and ADFA . 
 Following Townsville , the
Context:
   Onkaparinga , SA ( 4,700 people ) 
 Current Regular service members were most likely to have changed usual address in the past five years . Approximately four in
Context:) and previous service members ( 74.8 % ) aged 15 64 , were more likely to be employed than those who had never served in the ADF ( 73.7
Context:those who had never served , current Reserves service members aged 15 64 were more likely to be in full time employment than those who had never served ( 64.8
Context:% compared to 43.9 % respectively ) . Current Reserves service members were also less likely than those who had never served to be in part time employment ( 19.0
Context:compared to 4.1 % ) . 
 Similarly , previous service members were also more likely to be employed full time compared to those who had never served ( 56.0
Context:never served ( 56.0 % compared to 43.9 % ) . They were also less likely than those who had never served to be employed part time ( 13.7 %
Context:particularly those in the Regular service . In contrast , previous service members were more likely to live in their own home , either owned outright ( 48 % )
Context:
  provide communal or transitory accommodation . For current ADF service members this is more likely to include defence establishments like barracks , while for non service members this can
Context:18,600 people lived in a non private dwelling . 
 Current service members were more likely to live in a non private dwelling ( 11 % or 8,570 people )
Context:private dwellings who were at home on Census Night , those currently serving were most likely to be living in a couple family with children ( 43 % ) (
Context:
 According to the 2021 Census , current Regular and Reserve service members were more likely to have completed year 12 ( ) ( 81 % and 79 % ,
Context:positions in the ADF . 
 According to the 2021 Census , females were more likely than males to obtain a bachelor degree or higher . Around half of current
Context:% of females who have never served .  
 Current Reserves service members were more likely to obtain a bachelor degree or higher ( 42.3 % ) than current Regular
Context:never served ( 28.1 % ) . 
 Current Reserves service members were also most likely to obtain postgraduate degree level qualifications ( 15.4 % ) , compared to current
Context:currently serving just 1.2 % needed assistance , with those aged 45 64 years more likely to need assistance ( 2.2 % ) than those aged 15 44 years (
Context:see the . 
 According to the 2021 Census , current service members were less likely to report a long term health condition than those with previous service and those
Context:common long term health conditions reported by current service members were : 
 It is likely that the short question used in the Census to collect long term health condition
Context:This , together with the older age profile of previous service members , is a likely contributor to the higher incidence of long term health conditions among those who had
Context:% respectively ) 
   younger current service members ( 15 44 years ) were less likely to report a long term health condition ( 16 % ) than those aged
Context:term health condition 
   those who had previously served in the Regular service were more likely to report a long term health condition than those whose previous service was in
Context:served in the ADF , those who had served in the Regular service were more likely to report a mental health condition ( 18 % ) than those who had
Context:% ) . 
 Reflecting their older age profile , previous service members were more likely to report each of the selected long term health conditions than those who had
Context:( 16 % ) . 
 People who had served in the ADF were more likely to have volunteered ( ) in the previous 12 months than those who had
Context:compared with 15 % of those who had never served . 
 Females were more likely to have volunteered in the previous 12 months regardless of their type of service
Context:ever served , females who had previously served in the Reserves service only were most likely to report that they had volunteered in the previous 12 months ( 27 %

Title : overseas-arrivals-and-departures-australia-2023-24-financial-year.txt
Context:most common reason for journey . 
 In 2023 24 , female visitors were more likely than males to record their main reason for journey as ' holiday ' or
Context:' holiday ' or ' visiting friends / relatives ' . Male visitors were more likely to record ' business ' , ‘ conference ’ or ' employment ' than
Context:of 65 % in May 2021 . 
 Female residents returning to Australia were more likely than male residents to record their main reason for journey as ' holiday '
Context:' holiday ' or ' visiting friends / relatives ' . Male residents were more likely to record ' business ' , ‘ conference ’ or ‘ employment ’ than

Title : mental-health-findings-lgbtq-australians.txt
Context:reporting on statistics in this article . 
 In general , LGB+ people were more likely to experience a mental disorder than heterosexual people .  
 Of all LGB+ people
Context:, including : 
 For both LGB+ and heterosexual people , younger people were more likely to use health services than older people . Over half ( 54.6 % )
Context:both LGB+ and heterosexual people , those with a 12 month mental disorder were more likely to use health services than people who did not have a 12 month mental
Context:. 
 However , compared with young cis people , young trans people were more likely to experience a mental disorder at some time in their life and 12 month

Title : modelled-indicative-state-and-territory-level-industry-jobs-and-hours-worked-estimates.txt
Context:and Statistics Act 1905 , results have been confidentialised to ensure that they are not likely to enable identification of a particular person or organisation . 
 As the national

Title : 10-characteristics-australian-businesses-year-ended-30-june-2022.txt
Context:and Professional , scientific and technical industry ( both 72 % ) were the most likely to report having placed online orders . 
 The most reported ICTs used were

Title : anzsco-maintenance-strategy-core-components.txt
Context:Occupation group is deemed to contains jobs at different skill levels , the ABS will likely create a new Occupation . 
 Because predominant skill level defines each of ANZSCO
Context:Groups . 
 The remaining workers would be coded to another relevant group , most likely a ‘ Not Elsewhere Classified ’ ( NEC ) category . This is done

Title : religious-affiliation-australia.txt
Context:Century , Christianity was introduced by the British . Other migration to Australia that has likely impacted the religious landscape includes : 
 The trend of an increase in Other
Context:affiliation of people in Australia varied across generations . Generally , older generations were more likely to be affiliated with Christianity and younger generations were more likely to have no
Context:older generations were more likely to be affiliated with Christianity and younger generations were more likely to have no religious affiliation . 
 For example , more than two thirds
Context:69.4 % ) of the Interwar generation were affiliated with Christianity and were the least likely to have No religion ( 18.6 % ) . 
 Millennials had the highest

Title : measuring-australias-excess-mortality-during-covid-19-pandemic-until-december-2023.txt
Context:a coroner in the NT . The number of deaths that occurred in 2023 are likely to increase as more registrations are received , which may result in positive excess
Context:higher weeks of mortality later in the year , these are single weeks and most likely represent natural variation in mortality .  
   Over the winter months of 2022 ,
Context:
   There was a large decline in mortality between 2017 and 2018 . This is likely due to the severe influenza season in 2017 causing some mortality displacement in 2018

Title : sexual-assault-perpetrators.txt
Context:were found guilty by the court , defendants who pleaded guilty were : 
   Less likely to be sentenced to custody in a correctional institution ( 71 % compared with
Context:custody in a correctional institution ( 71 % compared with 89 % ) 
   More likely to receive a fully suspended sentence ( 15 % compared with 5.7 % )
Context:receive a fully suspended sentence ( 15 % compared with 5.7 % ) 
   More likely to receive a community supervision or work order ( 8.5 % compared with 2.1
Context:were found guilty by the court , defendants who pleaded guilty were : 
   Less likely to be sentenced to custody in a correctional institution ( 25 % compared with
Context:in a correctional institution ( 25 % compared with 29 % ) 
   Twice as likely to receive a community supervision or work order ( 20 % compared with 10
Context:found guilty by the court , defendants who pleaded guilty were : 
   Half as likely to be sentenced to custody in a correctional institution ( 13 % compared with
Context:in a correctional institution ( 13 % compared with 25 % ) 
   Half as likely to receive a fully suspended sentence ( 7.5 % compared with 16 % )
Context:a fully suspended sentence ( 7.5 % compared with 16 % ) 
   Twice as likely to receive another non custodial order ( 31 % compared with 16 % )
Context:is a consequence of the fact that prisoners sentenced to longer prison terms are more likely to be enumerated in the Prisoner Census . Prisoners that are sentenced to shorter
Context:are sentenced to shorter prison terms over the course of a financial year are more likely to have completed their term by June 30 , whilst prisoners that are sentenced
Context:by June 30 , whilst prisoners that are sentenced to longer prison terms are more likely to remain in prison ( including prisoners sentenced to imprisonment in previous financial years

Title : northern-territory-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:
 In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in Northern Territory were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report
Context:Territory were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were slightly more likely to report having no long term health condition ( 68.0 % compared with 66.7

Title : covid-19-mortality-wave.txt
Context:19 during the Delta wave had a younger median age at death and were more likely to be from a lower socioeconomic background when compared to other waves .  
  

Title : producing-official-statistics-linked-data.txt
Context:‘ low profitability ’ result .  
 Grouping like features , a firm is more likely to be in the lower profitability group if :  
 Generally , these results

Title : digital-platform-workers-australia.txt
Context:Australia . That data collection was undertaken in 2020 , with the COVID 19 pandemic likely impacting the way people were working . 
 In the ABS data , not
Context:platform tasks undertaken included : 
 Of all digital platform workers , males were more likely to undertake transport and food delivery tasks ( 46 % ) and females were
Context:to undertake transport and food delivery tasks ( 46 % ) and females were more likely to undertake food delivery and other tasks ( 18 % ) . The task
Context:  the broader population ( 89 % ) , suggesting that students are slightly more likely to be digital platform workers . 
 For digital platform workers in the reference
Context:digital platform   work and wage based employment 
   female digital platform workers were more likely to indicate a preference for ' only wage based employment '   compared to

Title : charts-casual-employment-occupation-industry-and-job-mobility-august-2022.txt
Context:the pandemic . 
 The lower level of casual employment during the pandemic is more likely to be a reflection of the impact of the pandemic and other economic conditions

Title : how-administrative-data-improved-quality-2021-census.txt
Context:If a house was listed for rent around Census time , then we were more likely to decide it was empty . 
 For most houses , we had good
Context:from 0.9 % in Tasmania to 1.9 % in Northern Territory ) . This is likely due to field staff finding it more difficult to work out whether a house
Context:used information on how recently it was updated , its precision and whether it was likely to be a residential location . 
 To understand how well our administrative data

Title : tasmania-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-population-summary.txt
Context:in 
 In 2021 , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander females in Tasmania were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having
Context:in Tasmania were more likely than males to report having : 
 Males were more likely to report having heart disease ( 4.6 % compared with 2.9 % of females

Title : changes-seasonality-retail-turnover.txt
Context:of this event has grown again this year . At some point , it is likely the growth in the popularity of Black Friday sales will level off . The
Context:Black Friday , revisions for November and the surrounding months in the coming years are likely to be higher than usual .  
 We will continue to regularly review our

Title : education-australia-abc-bs-and-cs.txt
Context:primary and secondary students attended Catholic schools . 
 Overall primary school students were more likely to attend Government schools than secondary school students . In 2021 , 68.5 %
Context:schools . 
 Students who attended a Catholic or Other Non Government school were more likely to have a religious affiliation . In 2021 , 71.9 % of children who
Context:Government schools . 
 In 2021 , students who were attending Catholic schools were most likely to report being Catholic ( 61.1 % ) , while almost one in five
Context:. 
 People with long term health conditions or a need for assistance were less likely to be studying at the tertiary level than people without those conditions . 

Context:7.7 % away from work the week before Census . 
 Male teachers were more likely to work full time than female teachers ( 72.8 % and 58.9 % respectively
Context:primary , secondary and tertiary educators , with university lecturers and vocational education teachers most likely to work part time . 29.4 % of male tertiary educators worked part time
Context:compared with 43.7 % of female tertiary educators . 
 Primary school teachers were more likely to be part time than secondary school teachers : 
 The median weekly hours
Context:female secondary school teachers worked part time . 
 People working as teachers were more likely to volunteer than the general population . In 2021 , around one quarter (

Title : value-renewable-energy-construction.txt
Context:other electricity asset investment there are cases that this is not possible . This has likely resulted in a level of under coverage of renewable investment . 
 Other limitations

Title : employment-2021-census.txt
Context:was a particular increase in participation in employment during the age window females were most likely to have children ( 25 34 years)[1 ] in 2021 ( 77.4 % )
Context:37.5 % ) . 
 In 2021 , people aged 15 19 years were less likely to be employed than in 1971 . This was particularly true for males .
Context:female participation in unpaid domestic work remained consistent with previous censuses . Males were more likely to perform less than 5 hours of domestic work per week ( 29.4 %
Context:worked at home were male ( 52.6 % ) . 
 Female workers were more likely to participate than male workers in unpaid assistance to a person with a disability
Context:1,386 per week for males . This in part is due to females being more likely to work part time than males . The table below shows the median income
Context:18.9 % in 2016 to 20.4 % in 2021 . Females continued to be more likely than men to be employed as Professionals in 2021 ( 27.8 % ) similar
Context:, the proportion of owner managers has decreased . 
 Self employed people were more likely to be males than females in 2021 , similar to previous censuses . Almost
Context:in the categories of Technicians and Trades Workers , Professionals , and Managers were more likely to be self employed or employers . More than two thirds ( 68.2 %

