Date:
2022-06-14
Article Title:
 Have your say on the future of ABS geospatial data

Article Content:
Australian Statistician Dr David Gruen AO says the Geospatial Roadmap survey is the perfect opportunity for customers using, creating, or supplying geospatial data and technology to tell us what’s needed.
“The ABS has always provided a considerable amount of local and regional socio economic data that is used in location analysis, but our use of new data sources, including private sector sources, means richer, more detailed data, for smaller geographic areas,” Dr Gruen said.
“This will provide you with opportunities to ask new questions and to get answers to questions you thought could not be answered with our data.”
The expanded geospatial and place based work program is led by ABS’ Location Insights Branch, formed in mid 2021, which brings together a range of core capabilities as well as ABS leadership on new whole of government digital initiatives: the Australian Climate Service (ACS) and the Digital Atlas of Australia.
“ABS is at an exciting stage in our evolution. We have new data coming from our traditional Population and Agricultural Censuses and we will soon be supplying data in new ways, including via geospatial enabled web services and through Digital Atlas,” Dr Gruen said.
“You will be able to develop new insights for your favourite geographic region – whether it’s a suburb, river basin or electorate, or for a bespoke region like a 100km zone from the coastline.”
The Geospatial Roadmap survey will clarify ABS understanding of what our customers will need as we look to the future, while identifying barriers and ideas on how we might generate more value from geo enriched Australian statistical data.
Have your say and be part of the geospatial future! Complete to tell us how we can generate more value from geo enriched Australian statistical data.
is open now and closes Thursday 23 June 2022 – jump on it and have your say!
To stay informed on the ABS geospatial roadmap email 
