Date:
2024-02-27
Article Title:
 Mental health findings for LGBTQ+ Australians

Article Content:
Mental health is a key component of overall health and wellbeing. It underpins our individual and collective abilities to make decisions, build relationships and shape the world we live in
Community connectedness and positive relationships can act as protective factors creating a sense of belonging and affirming identify and value for LGBTQ+ people At the same time, people in LGBTQ+ communities often experience stigma, discrimination, bullying, violence and exclusion. As a result, a higher number of people in LGBTQ+ communities experience poorer social, emotional and psychological wellbeing and mental health This may lead to issues with work, relationships, finances, housing and other elements of life 
The ABS recognises people who have a lived experience of mental health concerns and that having   or not having   mental health concerns does not define a person. We acknowledge their unique experiences, and those of carers, families and supporters of people living with mental health concerns.
This article presents selected data on mental health for LGBTQ+ Australians from the . The Study provides information on a range of mental health related topics such as prevalence of mental disorders, service use for mental health and psychological distress.
The ABS uses, and supports the use of, the  on responsible, accurate and safe reporting on suicide, mental health concerns and alcohol and other drugs. The ABS recommends referring to these guidelines when reporting on statistics in this article.
In general, LGB+ people were more likely to experience a mental disorder than heterosexual people. 
Of all LGB+ people, three in four (74.5%) had experienced a mental disorder at some time in their life (compared with 41.7% of heterosexual people), including:
Of all LGB+ people, nearly three in five (58.7%) had a 12 month mental disorder (compared with 19.9% of heterosexual people), including:
  63.5% of gay or lesbian people
  80.1% of bisexual people
  93.1% of people who used a different term to describe their sexual orientation.
  42.8% of gay or lesbian people
  64.4% of bisexual people.
The proportion of LGB+ people who saw a health professional for their mental health was noticeably higher than that of heterosexual people.
Almost half of all LGB+ people (46.8%) saw a health professional for their mental health in the last 12 months (compared with 16.0% of heterosexual people), including:
For both LGB+ and heterosexual people, younger people were more likely to use health services than older people. Over half (54.6%) of LGB+ people aged 16 34 years saw a health professional for their mental health in the 12 months prior to interview, compared with 35.3% of LGB+ people aged 35 64 years.
Additionally, for both LGB+ and heterosexual people, those with a 12 month mental disorder were more likely to use health services than people who did not have a 12 month mental disorder. Around six in ten (60.5%) LGB+ people with a 12 month mental disorder saw a health professional for their mental health in the 12 months prior to interview, while around four in ten (42.7%) heterosexual people with a 12 month mental disorder had done so.
  More than one in three gay or lesbian people (35.0%)
  More than one in two bisexual people (53.0%).
Almost half of all LGB+ people (43.9%) had high or very high levels of psychological distress, compared with just over one in seven heterosexual people (15.4%). The LGB+ rate includes more than one in four gay or lesbian people (28.6%) and more than one in two bisexual people (51.5%) who had high or very high levels of psychological distress.
Almost half of all LGB+ people (47.8%) had seriously thought about taking their own life at some point in their lifetime, compared with just over one in seven heterosexual people (15.3%). The LGB+ rate includes around one in three gay or lesbian people (35.6%) and more than one in two bisexual people (54.1%) who had seriously thought about taking their own life at some point in their lifetime.  
More than two in five of all LGB+ people (41.2%) had self harmed in their lifetime, compared with 7.4% of heterosexual people. The LGB+ rate includes 27.1% of gay or lesbian people and 47.5% of bisexual people who had self harmed in their lifetime.
Many LGB+ people use self management strategies for their mental health, such as seeking support from family or friends (46.2%) and practising positive thinking and setting achievable goals (45.8%). Overall, more than four in five LGB+ people (85.1%) used at least one strategy for their mental health in the last 12 months, compared with over three in five (61.7%) heterosexual people.
The proportion of non binary people who had experienced a mental disorder at some time in their life was double the rate of both men and women, while the proportion of non binary people with a 12 month mental disorder was more than three times the rate of either men or women.
  Of all non binary people, more than four in five (85.2%) had experienced a mental disorder at some time in their life, compared with two in five of all men and all women (42.1% and 43.4%)
  Similarly, four in five (80.4%) non binary people had a 12 month mental disorder, compared with around one in five of all men and one in four of all women (18.3% and 24.3%).
The proportion of non binary people who saw a health professional for their mental health in the last 12 months (70.4%) was more than three times that of men and women (12.9% and 21.3%).
Across other measures, non binary people had significantly higher rates than the rest of the Australian population.
Four in five non binary people (79.6%) had seriously thought about taking their own life at some point in their lifetime, while one in seven men (14.9%) and just over one in six women (18.0%) had seriously thought about taking their own life at some point in their lifetime.
Almost three in four non binary people (72.8%) had self harmed in their lifetime compared with 6.7% of men and 10.3% of women.
Trans and gender diverse (trans) people and cisgender (cis) people aged 16–85 years had similar rates of experiencing a mental disorder at some time in their life (43.9% and 42.9%), while trans people had higher rates of 12 month mental disorders than cis people (33.1% compared with 21.3%).
However, compared with young cis people, young trans people were more likely to experience a mental disorder at some time in their life and 12 month mental disorders. Seven in ten (70.6%) trans people aged 16 34 years had experienced a mental disorder at some time in their life, compared with almost one in two (48.1%) cis people of the same age. The proportion of trans people aged 16 34 years with a 12 month mental disorder was almost twice that of cis people of the same age (58.8% compared with 31.1%).
More than one in four trans people (28.7%) saw a health professional for their mental health in the last 12 months compared with one in six cis people (17.2%).
Across a range of other measures, trans people generally had higher rates than cis people, more noticeably those in younger age groups:
More than one in four trans people aged 16–85 years (28.5%) had seriously thought about taking their own life at some point in their lifetime, compared with one in six cis people (16.5%).
  More than one in four trans people (26.3%) had high or very high levels of psychological distress while one in six cis people (16.5%) had high or very high levels of psychological distress
  Almost half of trans people aged 16–34 years (46.6%) had high or very high levels of psychological distress. This was more than double the rate of cis people of the same age (20.5%).
Close to one in five trans people (19.6%) had self harmed in their lifetime, compared with one in twelve cis people (8.5%).
Almost two in five trans people aged 16–34 years (39.5%) had self harmed in their lifetime, more than double the rate of cis people of the same age (16.8%).
The Study found that many trans people used self management strategies for their mental health. Almost two in three trans people (64.3%) used at least one strategy for their mental health, including 35.7% who increased their level of physical activity and 32.8% who did more of the things they enjoy.
This article has been peer reviewed by:
The ABS greatly values the knowledge, expertise and contributions of these reviewers and thanks them for their time and input.
  Mindframe, an Everymind program, represented by:Dr Elizabeth Paton, Project LeadAmelia Chooi, Senior Project Officer
  Dr Elizabeth Paton, Project Lead
  Amelia Chooi, Senior Project Officer
  LGBTIQ+ Health Australia, represented by:Nicky Bath, Chief Executive OfficerJames Zanotto, Policy, Research and Communications DirectorIan Down, Policy and Research Lead
  Nicky Bath, Chief Executive Officer
  James Zanotto, Policy, Research and Communications Director
  Ian Down, Policy and Research Lead
  Professor Adam Bourne, Director, Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health and Society, La Trobe University
  Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care, represented by:Dr Helen Benassi, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Division.
  Dr Helen Benassi, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Division.
Sexual orientation is an umbrella concept that encapsulates:
Responses to a sexual orientation question are a subjective view of oneself and can change over the course of a person's lifetime and in different contexts. An individual could respond differently to questions on either sexual identity, attraction or behaviour.
This question is designed to collect data on self perceived sexual identity, which is how a person thinks of their sexuality and the terms they identify with, and a person's romantic or sexual attraction to others. The question was not designed for specific or detailed studies of sexual behaviour.
  sexual identity (how a person thinks of their sexuality and the terms they identify with)
  attraction (romantic or sexual interest in another person)
  behaviour (sexual behaviour). 
Gender is a social and cultural concept. It is about social and cultural differences in identity, expression and experience as a man, woman or non binary person. Non binary is an umbrella term describing gender identities that are not exclusively male or female.
In statistical collections, gender may be reported in terms of a person's felt or lived gender, as well as how that person is perceived by others, depending on whether information on gender is based on self reported data or done by proxy.
Gender experience describes a person’s alignment with the sex recorded for them at birth i.e., a cisgender (cis) experience or a trans and gender diverse (trans) experience. The term cis describes persons whose gender is the same as their sex recorded at birth (male or female). The term trans describes persons whose gender is different to their sex recorded at birth.  
A person's sex is based upon their sex characteristics, such as their chromosomes, hormones and reproductive organs. While typically based upon the sex characteristics observed and recorded at birth or infancy, a person's reported sex can change over the course of their lifetime and may differ from their sex recorded at birth.
Sex recorded at birth refers to what was determined by sex characteristics observed at birth or infancy. This is an important indicator for statistical analysis in births and deaths, health statistics, calculating fertility rates and deriving counts for cis and trans populations.
A small number of people do not have a sex of male or female recorded at birth or infancy. 'Another term' is the third response option for the sex at birth question.
Variations of sex characteristics refers to people with innate genetic, hormonal or physical sex characteristics that do not conform to medical norms for female or male bodies. It refers to a wide spectrum of variations to genitals, hormones, chromosomes and/or reproductive organs.
Other umbrella terms used to describe being born with variations of sex characteristics are intersex or Differences/Disorders of Sex Development (DSD).
People who have experienced a mental disorder at some time in their life refers to people who have met the diagnostic criteria for having a mental disorder at some time in their life. This does not imply that a person has had a mental disorder throughout their entire life.
In the National Study of Mental Health and Wellbeing three groups of mental disorders were assessed – Anxiety, Affective and Substance Use disorders – based on definitions and criteria of the World Health Organization International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD 10).
The term mental disorder is used in this article to align with these definitions and criteria.
12 month mental disorders refers to the number of people who met the diagnostic criteria for having a mental disorder at some time in their life and had sufficient symptoms of that disorder in the 12 months prior to when they completed the survey.
In the National Study of Mental Health and Wellbeing three groups of mental disorders were assessed – Anxiety, Affective and Substance Use disorders – based on definitions and criteria of the World Health Organization International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD 10).
The term mental disorder is used in this article to align with these definitions and criteria.
The Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10) is a widely used indicator, which gives a simple measure of psychological distress. It is not a diagnostic tool but is an indicator of psychological distress.
The K10 is based on a person's emotional state during the 4 weeks prior to the survey interview. People were asked a series of 10 questions, about how often they felt:•    tired for no good reason•    nervous•    so nervous nothing could calm them down•    hopeless•    restless or fidgety•    so restless that they could not sit still•    depressed•    that everything was an effort•    so sad that nothing could cheer them up; and•    worthless.
For each question, an answer was provided using a five level response scale, based on the amount of time a person reported experiencing the problem. The response scale corresponded to the following:•    none of the time•    a little of the time•    some of the time•    most of the time•    all of the time.
Scores were collated; low scores indicated low levels of psychological distress, and high scores indicated high levels of psychological distress.
Self harm refers to a person intentionally causing pain or damage to their own body. This behaviour may be motivated as a way of expressing or controlling distressing feelings or thoughts. Self harm and suicide are distinct and separate acts although some people who self harm are at an increased risk of suicide.
  World Health Organization, '', accessed 23 February 2024.
  LGBTIQ+ Health Australia, '', accessed 23 February 2024.
  Head to Health, '', accessed 19 February 2024.
  Healthdirect, '', accessed 19 February 2024.
The full methodology of the  can be found here:
.
