Date:
2024-08-20
Article Title:
 Producing Official Statistics from Linked Data

Article Content:
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) collects data across Australia’s public and business sectors. This article attempts to derive further insights from this data which can inform decisions across the economy, offering additional benefits to the Australian public.
Investigations into the Business Characteristics Survey (BCS) were initiated to seek a method for relating individual data items to observable business outcomes. Outcomes relating to profitability changes over time were considered and represented by a profitability score. The intention was to identify characteristics common to lower score businesses in one sample, and to estimate the performance of the statistical model by testing it against another sample.
To do this, a random forest classifier was employed; a machine learning (ML) method to classify businesses with lower and higher profitability. The random forest classifier uses decision trees to iteratively distinguish the two profitability groups from each other based on other characteristics of those businesses. Each decision of a component decision tree identifies a feature which best splits the two classes. The random forest classifier reflects the majority decisions across all decision trees to estimate the splitting approach which best distinguishes businesses belonging to the two profitability classes.
This classifier was tasked with identifying BCS features that are associated with businesses regarded as either in a “higher profitability score” group or a distinct “lower profitability score” group. The trained classifier, once developed to make such distinctions reliably, was scrutinised to understand its inner workings and uncover which aspects of the data contribute to these decisions. 
This article provides a concise overview of the findings documented in the Technical Report linked here: “"
Data sourced from five consecutive BCSs from 2015 16 to 2019 20 were considered for this investigation, creating a wide panel containing all variables of interest.
The classes (lower profitability and higher profitability) were derived from a profitability score which itself was sourced from profitability comparison responses from 2017 18 to 2019 20. This reduced range was required as otherwise the sample size would have been too small. For each of these cycles, each response option (decreased/stayed the same/increased) was given a value (1, 2, 3, respectively). These were added together to form the profitability score ranging from 3 (consecutive decreases) to 9 (consecutive increases). The profitability classes then needed to be projected onto these values in such a way that the classes were not too granular nor imbalanced in terms of size. Profitability scores from 3 to 6 were labelled as “lower profitability”, and those greater than 6 labelled as "higher profitability”.  
These 154 data items from across the five survey cycles were considered to predict the profitability class. This was ultimately realised as 735 features for the model.
The selection of businesses informing the model were those participating in all four surveys which also had a valid profitability score (that is, no missing response elements). These amounted to 1,070 businesses.
The Python programming language was used to implement the random forest classifier available in scikit learn package. The sktime framework was also used.  
The data was split into a training and testing set containing 80% and 20% of the data, respectively. The training set was used to develop the model itself. A splitting metric, entropy, was used to quantify what the “best” decision was at each stage of the trees’ development. This metric measured the purity of each split; a high entropy split would contain a mix of businesses while a low entropy split would contain businesses belonging to one of the profitability classes. Low entropy splits are the desired result. Their effects were expressed as normalised mean feature importances (FIs) which, together with confidence intervals (a measure of the model’s reliability), were used to retain only the most informative features.
This test set, kept independent of the model’s development, was used to estimate the model’s performance against new data. The features of the test set businesses were input to the model to predict the profitability class. As the businesses in the test set will each belong to a profitability class, these true classifications can be compared to those predicted. 
To provide a baseline comparison a naïve approach to classification was applied, creating a dummy classifier. The training of this classifier ignores all features, assigning the training set’s most common classification (lower profitability) to all inputs. Applying this classifier to the test dataset yielded an accuracy of 57.01%. 
Following the feature selection process described earlier produced a dataset of seventeen features, with the random forest composed of 463 decision trees. A more detailed breakdown of this process with examples provided is available in the Technical Report. 
Applying this classifier to the training set yielded the classification accuracy of 81.78%, and applying it to the test set had an accuracy of 79.44%. The classifier correctly identified 107 lower profitability businesses out of 122 (87.70%), a stronger result than demonstrated by the 63 out of 92 higher profitability businesses (68.48%). This suggests that the features found by the classifier may be better at predicting lower profitability than higher profitability. Additional discussion and an investigation into creating additional sample classification rules can be found in the Technical Report.
The features with the largest positive mean normalised FIs are shown in Figure 2 
The largest mean normalised FIs in Figure 2 relate to features from multiple survey cycles, but each compares a business attribute to the previous year (productivity and sales income). As with the breakdown of the Profitability variable discussed earlier, responses include Not applicable [0], Decreased [1], Stayed the same [2] and Increased [3]. The remaining smaller mean normalised FIs relate to features with a 0 or 1 response. 
The feature importances with the highest scores are correlated strongly with the variable being classified, which is profitability group. Given the results shown in Figure 1, the strongest interpretation of these values is to think of them in terms of the negative ‘low profitability’ result. 
Grouping like features, a firm is more likely to be in the lower profitability group if: 
Generally, these results are consistent with high level intuition – higher productivity in particular should generally result in higher returns to factors of production (labour and capital, with capital benefiting the most in the short run).  
Sales of goods and services and number of jobs are less direct signals, but still in line with expectations. The relationship found by the classifier suggests two conclusions. Firstly, profitability is being interpreted in the question asked in the survey as total (i.e. dollar) profitability, rather than a profitability rate. And secondly, increasing the scale of the business (sales and jobs) increases profitability. While neither conclusion is surprising, they are not guaranteed from the structure of the survey, and the confirmation provided by the classifier provides a useful check on the internal consistency of the businesses responding. 
  income from goods and services is flat or falling; 
  total number of jobs are flat or falling; 
  productivity is flat or falling. 
This pilot project has demonstrated a methodology to use ML classification of BCS data to better understand the implications of the responses provided by businesses on the survey. This capability is of enormous value, as it means that the existing survey responses can be used to create new statistical insights.  
Three areas of further work could be considered by the ABS and the broader research community: 
  Future iterations of the BCS (and similar surveys) could consider this use in their design. This could involve asking questions or processing responses in a way that lends itself more naturally to this type of analysis (see the Technical Report for further discussion). 
  With more time series data, time series classification approaches could be used, which would allow for greater causal conclusions to be drawn about the classifier results. In the existing analysis it is hard to determine the direction of causation. 
  Finally, with further refinement, these techniques could allow for the construction of new headline statistics based on the classifier approaches. This would build on the existing work done in the Digital Intensity Index and Innovation Index in the 2021 22 and 2020 21 BCS publications. 
The author thanks Eugene Schon (Methodology Division, ABS) for reading an early draft of the Technical Report and providing useful comments. Gratitude also goes to Franz Király for several useful discussions about sktime features over the course of the project. The author would also like to acknowledge the work of the Technology, Innovation and Business Characteristics Statistics section for their assistance preparing this document, with special thanks to Adam Hill and Rocco Borino.
Dr Jason WhyteSenior Statistical AnalystBusiness Statistics Production and Futures Branch
Whyte, Jason M. Producing Official Statistics from Linked Data   Pilot Project: Technical Report. Technology, Innovation and Business Characteristics Statistics, Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2024. 
Python Software Foundation. Python Language Reference, version 3.10.9. Available at https://www.python.org. 
Pedregosa, F, et al. Scikit learn: machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research. 2011, Vol. 12. 
Markus Löning, Anthony Bagnall, Sajaysurya Ganesh, Viktor Kazakov, Jason Lines and Franz Király. Sktime: A unified framework for machine learning with time series. Vancouver, Canada : s.n., 2019. 
Király, F, et al. Sktime v0.30.2. zenodo.org. [Online] 2024. https://zenodo.org/records/12653146. 
The entirety of data used in the study, composed of instances with associated features and labels.
Some aspect of a data set, possibly the time series of a particular variable, or more simply, a variable at a particular time point. 
The unit of study (e.g. a business in the in scope population drawn from BCS data). 
Distinct from features, a value (e.g. integer) for each instance which indicates the category to which the instance belongs. This is essential for classification problems, and labels should be data, not infilled. 
A portion of the data (80% in this study) used for training a classifier.  
Distinct from the training set, a reserved portion of the data set (20% in this study) used in evaluating the performance of a trained classifier. 
A particular method for classifying instances into categories. A non trivial classifier can be thought of as a particular example of a family of related classifiers, where each example corresponds to each hyper parameter taking a particular value.
The percentage of correct classifications out of the total number of instances. In a binary classification problem:


A process in which classifier parameters are adjusted with the aim of maximising the classifier’s ability to correctly classify instances in the training set.  
In a binary classification problem with instance labels 0 and 1, this is an instance with label 1 that is incorrectly classified (that is, assigned label 0).
In a binary classification problem with instance labels 0 and 1, this is an instance with label 0 that is incorrectly classified (that is, assigned label 1).
A property of classification produced natively by certain classifiers in Python, such as random forests. The total FI is 100%, which is divided amongst the features. The FI for a given feature can vary over the trees in the ensemble. For this reason, mean FI is useful, as well as the standard deviation of FIs. Higher mean FI values indicate the features that are more important to the classifier. 
The use of a trained classifier to predict the labels of all instances in a data set (e.g. the test set).  
There is a large literature on classification methods, and various subtleties. Briefly, a random forest classifier is collection (or “ensemble”) of decision trees that are independently trained to produce a classification for each instance drawn from the training set. The classification produced for an instance is obtained by combining the classifications produced by each tree in the forest. (For example, the classification given may be the most common classification produced across the ensemble of trees.)  In fitting a random tree to data, a group of features are randomly selected. For each in turn, a random value is chosen to serve as a value for a “split” (decision point). Instances having a feature value below the split value are allocated to one group, all other instances are assigned to a separate group. A suitable split produces subsequent branches of a decision tree that are more similar (“less impure”) than the data subsets seen at higher levels of the tree. Otherwise, an unsuitable split is disregarded, and the process is trialled again with another feature. The end result is the bottom layer of the tree (leaves), where each leaf will ideally contain instances that are quite similar and which mostly have the same label.  
The classifier that results from classifier training. This can be used for prediction.
In a binary classification problem with instance labels 0 and 1, this is an instance with label 0 that is correctly classified.
In a binary classification problem with instance labels 0 and 1, this is an instance with label 1 that is correctly classified. 
