Date:
2024-02-21
Article Title:
 Restraint Clauses, Australia, 2023

Article Content:
Restraint clauses in employment contracts are conditions that restrict an employee from sharing information, moving to a competitor, or prohibiting a former employee from approaching clients or co workers. They exist to protect an employer’s information and business interests.
Given the general decline in job mobility over time, there is an increasing interest in understanding potential factors that may prevent employees from changing jobs and employers, or that make it more difficult or less appealing to make a change, or that limit the ability of employers to attract potential employees to fill vacant jobs. Restraint clauses are one potential factor.
To better understand the use and prevalence of different types of restraint clauses in Australia, in late 2023 the ABS conducted the Short Survey of Employment Conditions, the first ABS employer survey on this topic. It focused on asking simple questions that could reasonably be answered by businesses, to provide timely new insights.
Using the Employee Earnings and Hours (EEH) responding sample, around 7,000 businesses were approached to answer a series of follow up questions on restraint clauses. Unlike EEH, the short survey was not compulsory but still achieved a relatively high response rate of around 70%. The ABS would like to thank these businesses for their important contribution to this representative data, on a topic for which official statistics have not previously been available.
As this was the first attempt at collecting such information, and the ABS attempted to minimise reporting effort for businesses through the use of simple questions, the data and insights should be considered experimental and exploratory.
It is also important to remember when interpreting this employer level data that businesses vary in size, and that a percentage of businesses within the Australian labour market does not necessarily translate into a similar percentage of employees in Australia (that is, a large employer will account for a higher proportion of employees in Australia than a small employer). Further contextual information on this can be found at the bottom of this release, under .
 
Note: Data presented in this article is rounded to one decimal place. At times, this can result in the component items not equaling the total due to rounding.
Non disclosure clauses were the most common restraint clause, used by 45.3% of Australian businesses in 2023. The next most common was the Non solicitation of clients (25.4%), followed by Non compete (20.8%) and Non solicitation of co workers (18.0%).
All businesses were asked if any of these four restraint clauses applied to their employees. Those that answered yes were then asked further follow up questions. An ‘unsure’ option was also provided. More information on this can be found in .
46.9% of all Australian businesses reported they used at least one type of restraint clause. 
Of those that reported at least one of the four clauses, a high proportion indicated that they only used one clause (19.2% of businesses) or all four restraint clauses (14.0%).
Of the 46.9% of Australian businesses that used a restraint clause, most used a Non disclosure clause. 18.3% of businesses only used a Non disclosure clause, while 6.3% used Non disclosure clauses and one other type, and 6.6% used Non disclosure clauses and two other types. 
Businesses that used restraint clauses were asked to indicate a percentage range for the share of employees that were covered by these clauses. The below percentages only refer to employers that reported using a particular restraint clause.
The majority of businesses that used restraint clauses reported that these clauses applied to 76 100% of their employees.
Businesses that used restraint clauses were asked to describe their use over the past five years for each type of clause. Proportions below refer to businesses who reported using that restraint clause.
The majority of businesses reported that their use of restraint clauses had generally remained the same over the past five years. However, across the clauses a higher proportion of employers reported an increased use than a decreased use.
The expected future use of each restraint clause was asked of all businesses, regardless of their current use. These results were used to derive proportions according to each restraint clause, with Non disclosure clauses the most likely to be used in the future (41.2% of businesses indicated ‘very likely’ and 14.4% indicated ‘somewhat likely’). 
Expected future use was strongly correlated with an employer’s current use.
If a business was currently using a clause type, it was highly likely they expected to continue to use it in the future. 77.1% of businesses that used Non disclosure clauses were 'very likely' to use them in future, and that proportion was also high, above 70%, for the other clauses, Non solicitation: co workers (71.8%), Non compete (71.4%) and Non solicitation: clients (71.0%). 
If a business was not currently using a clause type, it was less likely that they expected to use it in the future.
45.6% of businesses that did not currently use a Non compete clause reported that they were ‘very unlikely’ to begin using it in the future. The respective proportions of ‘very unlikely’ responses for the other clauses were: Non disclosure (43.7%), Non solicitation: clients (43.2%) and Non solicitation: co workers (41.7%). 
Among the different types of restraint clauses, there is a particular interest in understanding the impact of Non compete clauses, given their potential implications for job mobility and the ability of employers to attract potential employees to fill vacant jobs.
Approximately one percent of Australian businesses said that a potential employee had turned down their job offer because of a Non compete clause. This did not necessarily mean that a Non compete clause had been legally enforced (though, of the businesses that used at least one restraint clause, 5.1% indicated they had taken or threatened legal action to enforce a restraint clause   not necessarily a Non compete clause).
Large businesses (with 1,000 employees or more) had the highest use of Non compete clauses (40.0%). Conversely, small businesses (0 to 19 employees) had the lowest use of Non compete clauses (20.2%).
The majority of businesses in Australia fall into the small business category (0 to 19 employees), which is why the following graph shows similar proportions between the overall total for businesses and those in the 0 to 19 category.
When examining the use of Non compete clauses by employers at an industry level, the highest use was in the Financial & insurance services (39.6%) and Rental, hiring & real estate services (32.6%) industries. 
Retail trade (12.7%) and Construction (13.3%) had the lowest use of Non compete clauses.
The Short Survey of Employment Conditions collected summary employer level information from employers, rather than individual employee/job level information. Its focus was on the use of restraint clauses by employers, with some high level information around prevalence within businesses (which showed that generally, where clauses were used, they often applied to most or all employees in that business).
It is important to remember when interpreting employer level data that businesses vary in size, and that a percentage of businesses within the Australian labour market does not necessarily translate into a similar percentage of employees in Australia (given a large employer will account for a higher proportion of employees in Australia than a small employer). 
This section provides a sense of what proportion of total employee jobs were in businesses that used restraint clauses. This information is useful for understanding and analysing prevalence measures. 
Employer's share of employees is presented below for context, for each type of restraint clause. Not all individual employee jobs in these businesses were necessarily covered by these clauses (as can be seen in the data on ‘’):
  Non disclosure clauses were used in 45.3% of Australian businesses in 2023. These businesses accounted for 64% of all employee jobs (while businesses who didn’t use these clauses accounted for 23% of all employee jobs, and those who were unsure 13%).
  Non solicitation of clients clauses were used in 25.4% of Australian businesses in 2023. These businesses accounted for 36% of all employee jobs (while businesses who didn’t use these clauses accounted for 46% of all employee jobs, and those who were unsure 18%).
  Non compete clauses were used in 20.8% of Australian businesses in 2023. These businesses accounted for 31% of all employee jobs (while businesses who didn’t use these clauses accounted for 53% of all employee jobs, and those who were unsure 16%).
  Non solicitation of co workers clauses were used in 18.0% of Australian businesses in 2023. These businesses accounted for 29% of all employee jobs (while businesses who didn’t use these clauses accounted for 51% of all employee jobs, and those who were unsure 19%).
