Title : dq230517d-eng.htm.txt
Context:  10   hours ) . Females were significantly more likely than males to report usual sleep duration in the recommended
Context:5 % ) . Male Regular Force members were more likely than female members to be classified as overweight ( 45

Title : dq240110a-eng.htm.txt
Context:for a lack of employer sponsored plans . Those most likely to have a government sponsored plan included seniors , people

Title : dq240523d-eng.htm.txt
Context:income of racialized workers , " racialized workers were more likely than their non racialized counterparts to receive financial support through
Context:, with racialized women ( 30 % ) being more likely than racialized men ( 27 % ) to receive the

Title : dq240903b-eng.htm.txt
Context:
 The study also shows that AI might be more likely to transform the jobs of highly educated workers than those

Title : dq240402b-eng.htm.txt
Context:45   to   54   years remained the most likely to make RRSP contributions , with just over one third

Title : dq231006b-eng.htm.txt
Context:aged   18   to   34   were least likely to have a RHCP , compared with all other age
Context:groups , those living in remote areas were significantly more likely than those living in easily accessible areas to report having

Title : dq231211b-eng.htm.txt
Context:Canadian Social Survey allow us to observe the populations most likely to make a change in linguistic behaviour by introducing one
Context:only French or English most often at home were less likely to change their linguistic behaviour than people who only spoke
Context:Survey show that immigrants admitted recently to Canada are more likely to change their language behaviour . Approximately   23 %
Context:Canada outside Quebec and French in Quebec , were less likely to have since made a change to their language behaviour
Context:in Canada outside Quebec and English in Quebec were more likely to change their language behaviour in the five years prior
Context:a language other than English or French were even more likely to have made a change to their language behaviour (

Title : dq240813a-eng.htm.txt
Context:Labrador , Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick were least likely to report having them ( about   3 % each
Context:% ) and Ontario ( 1 % ) were most likely to report driving a pure electric vehicle in   2021

Title : dq230515b-eng.htm.txt
Context:traffic because of their smaller size they are therefore more likely to not be seen by other drivers on the road

Title : dq230322b-eng.htm.txt
Context:type of care . Unlicensed home based providers were more likely to offer child care during non standard hours ( that
Context:evenings , weekends , and overnight ) and were more likely to offer flexible child care ( 16 % ) in

Title : dq240605a-eng.htm.txt
Context:being ? 
 Teleworkers who worked from home were more likely to report being more satisfied with their work life balance
Context:, WFH teleworkers were   12   percentage points more likely than non teleworkers and   14   percentage points more
Context:than non teleworkers and   14   percentage points more likely than on site teleworkers to be satisfied or very satisfied
Context:day but worked on site on that day were most likely to have higher levels of time pressure . These differences
Context:pressure . For example , on site teleworkers were more likely to report constantly being under stress , cutting back on

Title : dq240731b-eng.htm.txt
Context:businesses ( 66.5 % ) continued to be the most likely to conduct innovation activities , followed by medium sized businesses
Context:
 Businesses with deeper transnational relationships seemed to be more likely to engage in innovation activities in   2022 , and
Context:activities in   2022 , and multinational businesses were more likely to conduct innovation activities than non multinational businesses . In
Context:in innovation activities in   2022   were also more likely to have received government support for innovation related activities during
Context:( 26.5 % ) . Large businesses were also more likely to engage in import activities compared with smaller businesses .
Context:% in   2019 . Exporting businesses were also more likely to report transportation infrastructure barriers in   2022 , increasing

Title : dq230510b-eng.htm.txt
Context:by immigration . 
 Homelessness support sector workers were more likely to be in poverty ( 6.7 % ) than all

Title : dq230911a-eng.htm.txt
Context:aged   25   years and older were much less likely to have tried vaping ( 15 % ) and much
Context:have tried vaping ( 15 % ) and much more likely to have tried cigarette smoking ( 52 % ) .
Context:% ) in   2022 . Men were also more likely than women to report cigarette smoking in the past  
Context:) and women ( 13 % ) were almost equally likely to have vaped in the past   30   days

Title : dq240415d-eng.htm.txt
Context:their home or were of low income status were less likely to have air conditioning in their homes compared with the

Title : dq240509a-eng.htm.txt
Context:events point to a shift in the industry and will likely affect Canadian import and export activity for motor vehicles and

Title : dq240403a-eng.htm.txt
Context:activity . 
 The larger the company , the more likely it is to conduct internal trade . While   44.9

Title : dq240311d-eng.htm.txt
Context:
 The results show that landed immigrant women were less likely than Canadian born women to experience the dissolution of their

Title : dq230922b-eng.htm.txt
Context:health in the previous year . 
 They were most likely to report having talked to a family doctor or general
Context:most common type of care received , people were most likely to report unmet needs for counselling services compared with medication

Title : dq230927a-eng.htm.txt
Context:to lead G7   countries for population growth and was likely among the top   20   fastest growing countries in

Title : dq231208a-eng.htm.txt
Context:three or more . These numbers , however , are likely an underestimate of the true number of infections by June

Title : dq240320a-eng.htm.txt
Context:and voluntarism promotion ( 3.9 % ) organizations were least likely to receive this funding . 
 Individual donations were a
Context:and sports and recreation ( 29.2 % ) were more likely to rely on funding in the form of membership fees
Context:) and health ( 69.7 % ) organizations were most likely to experience increases in demand . However , their capacity
Context:, advocacy and politics ( 92.2 % ) were most likely to have volunteers , while organizations focused on business and
Context:and development and housing ( 71.0 % ) were least likely to have volunteers . 
 For more information , or

Title : dq221208b-eng.htm.txt
Context:. Among all executives , immigrant women were the least likely to contribute on a board of directors , with  
Context:Canadian born women ( 53 % ) were all more likely to work as board directors . 
 As officers ,
Context:directors . 
 As officers , immigrant women were less likely to occupy higher top level roles . For example ,
Context:( 10 % ) were more than two times less likely to work as president of a corporation than immigrant men
Context:while immigrant women officers were more than two times more likely than immigrant men officers to hold a secretary position (
Context:were more than two times ( 32 % ) less likely than immigrant men executives ( 66 % ) to arrive
Context:arrive in Canada as principal applicants , while being more likely to be admitted as a spouse or dependant economic applicant
Context:example , immigrant women executives were about four times more likely to be born in the United States or the United
Context:. Moreover , immigrant women executives were two times more likely than Canadian born women executives to work for corporations controlled
Context:to work for corporations controlled by American entities and more likely to work for large corporations ( 47 % of immigrant
Context:Chinese women executives ( 34 % ) were the least likely to work in large firms , whereas women executives born
Context:women executives born in the United States were the most likely to do so ( 61 % ) . For Canadian

Title : dq240321b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, older adults who use the Internet are still less likely to adopt online banking than are younger Canadians . In
Context:2022 , racialized populations ( 79 % ) were less likely to bank online compared with the non racialized , non
Context:, non Indigenous population . 
 While immigrants were less likely than the Canadian born population to bank online ( 79
Context:Persons with a disability ( 74 % ) were less likely to conduct online banking compared with those without a disability
Context:not trust artificial intelligence ( AI ) technology were less likely to bank online ( 79 % ) , compared with
Context:( 78 % ) . Older Internet users were less likely to shop online , mirroring age based patterns in the
Context:  44 . 
 Other demographic groups that were less likely to make online purchases in   2022   included those

Title : dq240306c-eng.htm.txt
Context:Individuals , " found that immigrant owned businesses were more likely to be affected by the pandemic and the associated lockdowns
Context:) . 
 Conversely , immigrant owned businesses were less likely to receive the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy ( CEWS )
Context:found that immigrant majority owned businesses were on average more likely than businesses owned by Canadian born individuals to receive government
Context:to receive government support from CEBA and CECE but less likely to benefit from the CEWS . Immigrant majority owned businesses

Title : dq230406b-eng.htm.txt
Context:  14   years in   2006   were more likely to have completed high school or higher by   2016
Context:and third ( 73.6 % ) income quartiles were more likely to have completed high school or higher education compared with
Context:and fourth ( 58.3 % ) income quartiles were more likely to complete high school or higher education than those in

Title : dq221212b-eng.htm.txt
Context:in Ontario , British Columbia or Alberta were the most likely to stay in those provinces five years after their arrival

Title : dq240412c-eng.htm.txt
Context:This may be expected due to younger adults being more likely to rent than own . Nearly half of evictees reported

Title : dq240313b-eng.htm.txt
Context:treatment or were killed . Men and boys were more likely to sustain an injury regardless of the motivation for the
Context:and sex or gender ( 41 % ) were more likely to know the accused compared with victims of hate crimes

Title : dq240618b-eng.htm.txt
Context:challenges in adapting to a new country and were more likely to report having greater difficulty in making ends meet .
Context:% ) . Similarly , non permanent residents were more likely to report finding it difficult or very difficult to make
Context:) and Europe ( 34 % ) were the least likely to report experiencing financial difficulty in the past   12
Context:12   months , newcomers from other regions were more likely to experience hardship during this transition . In general ,
Context:) and Filipino ( 35 % ) Canadians were more likely to report having difficulty meeting their financial needs in the
Context:, Chinese Canadians ( 22 % ) were the least likely to report experiencing financial difficulty in the past   12
Context:April   2024 , newcomers from Asia were the most likely to report having financial difficulty and were one of the
Context:report having financial difficulty and were one of the least likely to report having satisfaction with their free time ( 22
Context:% ) . In contrast , despite being the least likely to report experiencing financial difficulty , recent immigrants from Europe
Context:difficulty , recent immigrants from Europe were among the least likely to report having a high level of satisfaction with their
Context:from the United States ( 32 % ) were as likely to report having high satisfaction with their amount of free

Title : dq240125b-eng.htm.txt
Context:binary . It is possible that older people are less likely to report being 2SLGBTQ+ because of having lived a significant
Context:people ( 54.7 % ) were over five times as likely as cisgender people ( 9.9 % ) to consider their

Title : dq230825a-eng.htm.txt
Context:in urban areas . These two farm types are more likely to engage in direct marketing activities as a source of
Context:farm operators , and consequently their household members , would likely live close to the farm ( Chart   2 )

Title : dq240913b-eng.htm.txt
Context:who were financially insecure in   2024   were less likely to feel satisfied with their lives than they were in
Context:per year during this period . 
 Among the most likely groups to be facing financial difficulty from   2021  
Context:and persons with disabilities all of whom were the least likely to report high levels of life satisfaction . 
 In

Title : dq230724a-eng.htm.txt
Context:% ) and Calgary ( 22 % ) were most likely to have been victims of fraud , while those living
Context:and St. John 's ( 13 % ) were least likely . 
 Most fraud victims had no losses ( 38
Context:% ) and Quebec ( 15 % ) were more likely than victims from other provinces to have reported the most
Context:victims living in Manitoba ( 6 % ) were least likely to report fraud to the police . 
 Almost all

Title : dq231201b-eng.htm.txt
Context:persons aged   65   years and older are more likely to have a disability than those in younger age groups
Context:  rates . As individuals age , they are more likely to experience a higher number of co occurring disabilities .
Context:and working age adults ( 36 % ) were most likely to have two or three disability types . 
 Overall
Context:. Additionally , women ( 43 % ) were more likely than men ( 39 % ) to have a more
Context:the pandemic . Working age adults with disabilities were more likely than youth and seniors to report financial challenges due to

Title : dq240910a-eng.htm.txt
Context:, teenaged girls in   2023   were the most likely to experience declines in their self reported mental health since
Context:) . 
 Compared with boys , girls were more likely to not only experience declines in their self rated mental

Title : dq230801a-eng.htm.txt
Context:
 People retiring for health or disability reasons were more likely to have stopped working at a younger age . Among

Title : dq230411a-eng.htm.txt
Context:both men and women living in subsidized housing were more likely to be dissatisfied with the safety and security of their
Context:subsidized housing ( 13 % ) were almost twice as likely as those in non subsidized rental housing ( 7 %
Context:the safety and security of their dwelling and twice as likely to be dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with their overall neighbourhood
Context:) . 
 Women in subsidized housing were also less likely to feel very or reasonably safe walking alone in their

Title : dq240426a-eng.htm.txt
Context:female led one parent families were almost four times more likely ( 23.8 % ) to live below the poverty line
Context:racialized groups , Filipino Canadians were the only group less likely to experience poverty than non racialized Canadians , at a
Context:( 29.4 % ) were more than four times as likely to experience poverty as those in families ( 7.3 %
Context:The more recent an immigrant 's arrival , the more likely they are to be below the poverty line . For

Title : dq240322b-eng.htm.txt
Context:the effects of the COVID 19   pandemic are less likely to be held by those with a bachelor 's degree
Context:to their employment status or employment plans were just as likely to be employed , but were less likely to be
Context:just as likely to be employed , but were less likely to be working full time three years later ( 79.7
Context:status or employment plans in   2020   were more likely than those who did not to feel they were overqualified
Context:( 26.6 % versus   18.4 % ) and less likely to feel that their job was strongly related to their

Title : dq240528b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, those with disabilities ( 16 % ) were more likely to work part time that is , fewer than  
Context:disabilities ( 28 % ) were more than twice as likely as those with milder disabilities ( 12 % ) to
Context:with more severe disabilities ( 13 % ) were more likely to be living below Canada 's official poverty line than

Title : dq241104a-eng.htm.txt
Context:days to less than two weeks . Inuit were most likely to report waiting one month or more to access a
Context:living off reserve and Métis women were nearly twice as likely to report this compared to men ( Chart   2
Context:% ) reported that such services would make them more likely to seek health care . About half of Inuit (

Title : dq231204b-eng.htm.txt
Context:in   1976 . Nevertheless , employed women remain less likely than men to be self employed ; in   2022
Context:less than   1 % . 
 Women are more likely than men to work independently without any paid employees .
Context:Self employed women ( 34 % ) were also less likely than men ( 54 % ) to be incorporated .

Title : dq231005c-eng.htm.txt
Context:sectors , as well as larger businesses , were more likely than other businesses to report interprovincial trade activities over the
Context:) and manufacturing ( 51.0 % ) sectors were more likely than businesses in other sectors to purchase goods or services
Context:in another province or territory . They were also more likely to sell goods or services to customers in another province
Context:  or more employees ( 44.9 % ) being more likely to do so than businesses with   1   to
Context:
 Regionally , businesses in the Northwest Territories were most likely to purchase goods or services from suppliers in another province
Context:businesses in Ontario ( 20.6 % ) were the least likely to report having purchased goods or services from suppliers in
Context:Newfoundland and Labrador ( 17.7 % ) were the least likely to sell goods or services to customers in another province

Title : dq240223b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, Indigenous people were on average   30 % more likely to be reconvicted than non Indigenous people . This was

Title : dq240314b-eng.htm.txt
Context:. 
 The older the tax filer , the more likely they are to make charitable donations . In   2022
Context:) . 
 Men ( 18.1 % ) were more likely to report charitable donations on their   2022   tax

Title : dq230619c-eng.htm.txt
Context:people ) . Women ( 22.7 % ) were more likely than men ( 19.7 % ) to experience high or
Context:those employed in health care and social assistance were more likely than the average worker to cite a heavy workload (
Context:) . At the same time , men were more likely than women to report work related stress in construction (

Title : dq231027a-eng.htm.txt
Context:2021 , Indigenous women ( 53.5 % ) were more likely than Indigenous men ( 44.4 % ) to have completed
Context:
 First Nations people , Métis and Inuit are more likely to live in certain geographic regions , which can impact
Context:non Indigenous population , non Indigenous adults were consistently more likely to have a postsecondary qualification across each level of remoteness
Context:very remote areas , meaning that they were twice as likely as their Indigenous counterparts in very remote areas ( 27.0
Context:living in easily accessible areas were more than twice as likely to have a postsecondary qualification than their counterparts in very
Context:with a bachelor 's degree or higher were all more likely to work in professional occupations ( that is , occupations
Context:aged   25   to   64   were less likely to experience overqualification than non Indigenous adults in the same

Title : dq230307b-eng.htm.txt
Context:and regions , some segments of the population remained more likely to experience a higher degree of financial challenges in fall
Context:to   54   ( 42 % ) were more likely to live in a household that found it very difficult
Context:living with children ( 42 % ) were also more likely to face this hardship . 
 A higher proportion of
Context:groups , Chinese ( 25 % ) were the least likely to experience financial difficulty compared with South Asian ( 44
Context:. 
 Indigenous people ( 44 % ) were more likely to experience financial difficulty compared with the non Indigenous population

Title : dq240228f-eng.htm.txt
Context:at least one year were   12   times more likely to be able to have a conversation in French (

Title : dq241126b-eng.htm.txt
Context:) in   2021 . 
 Condominium apartments were more likely to be sold within one year of purchase compared with
Context:other buyers . 
 Men and immigrants were also more likely to be individual property flippers . In   2020 ,

Title : dq241119b-eng.htm.txt
Context:20   to   35   years ) were more likely than older adults ( aged   36   years and
Context:adults . Studies have shown that younger adults are less likely to own their own homes . Similarly , according to
Context:Costs , young adults ( 35 % ) were more likely to be renting their dwelling than people in the older
Context:months . Racialized Canadians ( 3 % ) were more likely to experience housing related discrimination compared with non racialized people
Context:living in Quebec ( 56 % ) were the least likely to report experiencing one or more housing challenges . 

Context:people who experienced at least one housing challenge were less likely to report having high satisfaction with their local environment ,

Title : dq241127b-eng.htm.txt
Context:work permit holders . 
 These differences across sectors are likely influenced by factors such as wage levels , working conditions

Title : dq241024b-eng.htm.txt
Context:the perpetrator . As such , the data presented here likely underestimate the full scope of the issue . 
 In

Title : dq231212c-eng.htm.txt
Context:aged   18   to   24   were most likely to report moderate to severe symptoms of depression ( 33
Context:young people in Canada . 
 2SLGBTQ+ adults were more likely to report moderate to severe symptoms of depression ( 45
Context:heterosexual and cisgender adults . Indigenous people were also more likely to report moderate to severe symptoms of depression ( 29

Title : dq240208a-eng.htm.txt
Context:living in areas with high hate crime rates were less likely to report positive physical and mental health . In cities
Context:that regardless of hate crime rates , men were more likely to report positive mental health ( 54 % ) than
Context:. 
 In HHCA cities , racialized people were less likely to report positive mental health ( 44 % ) than
Context:low rates of hate crime , racialized people were more likely to report positive mental health ( 51 % ) than
Context:non racialized Canadians living in a HHCA city were more likely to report experiencing discrimination at least once in the five
Context:HHCAs , racialized people ( 61 % ) were more likely than non racialized people ( 37 % ) to experience
Context:of hate crime . This same trend of being less likely to know one 's neighbours in cities with higher hate
Context:, women , racialized Canadians and immigrants were nearly as likely to know their neighbours , regardless of whether their CMA

Title : dq231108c-eng.htm.txt
Context:, bisexual people ( 59.6 % ) were the most likely to report at least some difficulty in any functional health
Context:show that bisexual women ( 12.7 % ) were more likely than heterosexual women ( 7.3 % ) and heterosexual men
Context:cognition domain . Women of all sexual orientations were more likely than men of the same sexual orientation to report having
Context:, LGB adults , particularly bisexual women , were more likely to report poorer mental health and show a higher prevalence
Context:, previous studies have found that LGB individuals are more likely to experience income or food insecurity , precarious housing ,

Title : dq231214b-eng.htm.txt
Context:of these restrictions and the high demands for local journeypersons likely contributed to mobility remaining at an all time low .

Title : dq231205b-eng.htm.txt
Context:drug use ; women ( 43 % ) were more likely than men ( 28 % ) to state this .
Context:  2022 , women ( 26 % ) were more likely than men ( 16 % ) to cite concerns about
Context:assaulted or personally experienced sexualized or discriminatory behaviours were less likely to agree with this statement . 
 Ultimately , around

Title : dq230213b-eng.htm.txt
Context:years and older ( 25 % ) were the least likely to report difficulty . 
 Similarly , when asked whether
Context:years and older ( 19 % ) were the least likely to expect difficulty covering such an unexpected expense . 

Context:Census of Population , some of these groups were less likely to be home owners and more likely to face financial
Context:groups were less likely to be home owners and more likely to face financial vulnerability related to housing . Non racialized
Context:the least concerned with rising housing prices and the least likely to have their decision to move be influenced by the
Context:year . One possible explanation is that seniors are more likely to live on a fixed income or pension . 


Title : dq240806b-eng.htm.txt
Context:since the early   2000s , and this trend will likely continue until   2030 , that is , until the

Title : dq241108a-eng.htm.txt
Context:and   2023 , residents of Quebec were the least likely to live in a household experiencing difficulty meeting its financial
Context:. 
 People living in a rented dwelling were more likely to be in a household that found it difficult or
Context:( 24.3 % ) . 
 Immigrants were also more likely to be in households experiencing financial difficulties . In October
Context:  15   to   24   were the least likely to be very satisfied with their job ( 55.3 %
Context:  55   to   69   were the most likely to be very satisfied ( 68.1 % ) . About
Context:. 
 In October , self employed workers were more likely to be very satisfied with their job ( 70.0 %
Context:) . 
 Workers in agriculture were among the most likely to be very satisfied with their job ( 71.8 %
Context:) and retail trade ( 53.9 % ) were less likely to be very satisfied with their job compared to the

Title : dq240910b-eng.htm.txt
Context:renters ( 33.0 % ) were more than twice as likely to spend   30 % or more of their income
Context:, households living in social and affordable housing were less likely to be living in unaffordable housing compared with   2018
Context:% ) . Renters ( 20.8 % ) were more likely to be dissatisfied with the affordability of their housing than
Context:waiting for subsidized housing ( 41.7 % ) were more likely to be in unaffordable housing in   2022   compared
Context:
 These new renters ( 34.3 % ) were more likely to be dissatisfied with the affordability of their housing compared

Title : dq240326b-eng.htm.txt
Context:lower levels of education , while their children are more likely to have a higher level of education . 
 The
Context:and Southeast Asian immigrants are also among the groups more likely to have a bachelor 's degree or higher than their

Title : dq240508a-eng.htm.txt
Context:without special needs . Graduates with gifted status were more likely to transition to postsecondary education immediately ( about   70
Context:about   70 % within six years ) were less likely to do so , compared with graduates without special needs
Context:. Graduates with physical or sensory needs were also less likely to transition to postsecondary education within six years ( about
Context:% ) . 
 Graduates with gifted status were more likely to enrol in undergraduate degree programs ( about   75
Context:needs and those with physical or sensory needs were more likely to enrol in college level certificate programs , particularly in
Context:cognitive needs ( about   70 % ) were less likely to persist two years after postsecondary enrolment compared with graduates
Context:Graduates with mental health related or cognitive needs were less likely to transition to postsecondary education immediately , have first time

Title : dq230612b-eng.htm.txt
Context:and Indigenous identity . People living in Nunavut were most likely to report that the pandemic made them more inclined to
Context:% ) , and those in Quebec were the least likely ( 4 % ) . In addition , Filipino (
Context:( 22 % ) parents and guardians were the most likely to report being more inclined to get their children vaccinated
Context:Inuit parents and guardians ( 36 % ) were most likely to report being more inclined to get their children vaccinated

Title : dq231010b-eng.htm.txt
Context:. Overall , men ( 62 % ) were more likely to participate in sports than women ( 49 % )
Context:% of women ) populations where men were much more likely to play sports than women . The Arab population also
Context:Chinese ( 62 % ) populations were among the most likely to have played sports , and this remained true for
Context:Korean and Chinese women ) . Meanwhile , the least likely groups to report sport participation were South Asian ( 46
Context:
 In general , the Canadian born population was more likely to have participated in winter sports such as ice hockey
Context:and snowboarding , compared with immigrants , who were more likely to have played soccer , tennis or basketball . 

Context:( 17 % ) , who were nearly twice as likely as non racialized Canadians ( 10 % ) to cite
Context:) to cite this barrier . 
 Immigrants were more likely than their Canadian born counterparts to indicate lack of time
Context:% ) . Women ( 49 % ) were more likely than men ( 44 % ) to say they felt
Context:differences enriched the workplace , this group was the most likely to indicate that there were no cultural differences in their
Context:. Additionally , immigrants ( 10 % ) were less likely than Canadian born respondents ( 15 % ) to indicate
Context:workplace . Racialized groups ( 81 % ) were less likely than non racialized Canadians ( 86 % ) to feel
Context:do not belong to a racialized group , were most likely to say that they felt that cultural differences were respected
Context:Chinese ( 81 % ) people in Canada were least likely to believe that diversity was valued in their workplace .
Context:their workplace . Immigrants ( 82 % ) were less likely to indicate that cultural differences were respected in their workplace
Context:at work . Women ( 15 % ) were more likely than men ( 10 % ) to report having experienced
Context:27 % ) . 
 All racialized groups were more likely than the non racialized group ( 10 % ) to
Context:Korean ( 20 % ) people in Canada were most likely to experience some type of unfair treatment . Immigrants (
Context:treatment . Immigrants ( 15 % ) were also more likely than the Canadian born ( 11 % ) to experience

Title : dq240327e-eng.htm.txt
Context:and Saskatchewan ( 35 % ) . This regional variation likely reflects different selection criteria for the PNP across provinces and
Context:towards technical occupations than FSWP immigrants , who were more likely to be professionals . As a result , by  
Context:This reversal in initial earnings between the two groups was likely related to changes in the selection criteria for FSWP immigrants

Title : dq221212f-eng.htm.txt
Context:childhood . Men ( 25 % ) were slightly more likely to have been physically abused during childhood compared with women
Context:Women ( 12 % ) were about three times more likely than men ( 3.7 % ) to have been sexually
Context:or stepparent . Women ( 73 % ) were more likely than men ( 66 % ) to report that a
Context:% ) . Women ( 33 % ) were more likely than men ( 22 % ) to report that the
Context:who experienced childhood victimization ( 9.6 % ) were more likely than men ( 5.7 % ) to indicate that they
Context:. 
 Canadians who had experienced childhood victimization were more likely to experience a wide range of negative adult outcomes .
Context:experienced childhood victimization ( 18 % ) were twice as likely to rate their current mental health as fair or poor
Context:( 10 % ) , were more than twice as likely as those who had not experienced childhood victimization ( 4.8

Title : dq240516a-eng.htm.txt
Context:, importers in CMAs ( 51.1 % ) were more likely to import from multiple partner countries than importers outside CMAs

Title : dq240325c-eng.htm.txt
Context:- parent families headed by an immigrant woman are most likely to be in low income 
 Article Content : 

Context:by an immigrant woman ( 26.5 % ) were most likely to be in low income in   2020 , followed
Context:a Filipino immigrant woman ( 10.7 % ) were less likely to be in low income than persons in OPFs headed

Title : dq230123b-eng.htm.txt
Context:and Arab ( 14.9 % ) Canadians were the most likely to be in core housing need , while Filipino (
Context:) people were also among the groups that were most likely to be in core housing need . 
 The housing
Context:to this general trend , some groups have remained more likely over time to live in a dwelling owned by one
Context:and Latin American ( 48.6 % ) populations were least likely to live in a dwelling owned by one or some

Title : dq231110b-eng.htm.txt
Context:( 70 % ) . However , they were less likely to report a high level of trust in their neighbours
Context:and older ( 39 % ) were almost twice as likely to have a high level of trust in others as
Context:( 2 % ) . 
 Young people were more likely than seniors to use the Internet and social media to
Context:and print media ( 28 % ) were much more likely to be trusted , and this was true for all
Context:than their younger counterparts . They were almost twice as likely as those aged   15   to   24  
Context:health ( 75 % ) were more than twice as likely to have a strong sense of satisfaction with their relationships
Context:satisfaction with personal relationships were more than four times more likely to have a high level of trust in others (
Context:of trust in others ( 23 % ) were more likely to trust information and news from the media than those

Title : dq230113b-eng.htm.txt
Context:with the higher proportion of men who are generally more likely than women to work full time the share of employees
Context:employees working for businesses under federal jurisdiction were slightly more likely to work part time ( 12.4 % ) than men
Context:) . At the same time , women were less likely to experience harassment in banks overall ( 3.1 % )
Context:all women working in banks were less than half as likely to have experienced harassment in the previous two years (
Context:federal jurisdiction , men ( 8.4 % ) were more likely to be exposed to unsafe working conditions than women (

Title : dq240430c-eng.htm.txt
Context:% ) and Métis ( 7.6 % ) were less likely to be in managerial positions compared with non Indigenous people
Context:, Indigenous male managers ( 53.8 % ) were more likely than their non Indigenous counterparts ( 39.2 % ) to
Context:and customer services , Indigenous female managers were twice as likely to work in these jobs compared with their male counterparts
Context:. 
 Conversely , Indigenous men were nine times more likely to work in middle management occupations in trades , transportation
Context:2022 . Indigenous men ( 31.3 % ) were more likely to involuntarily work part time than Indigenous women ( 20.8
Context:E = use with caution ) were about twice as likely to have experienced unfair treatment and discrimination at work as

Title : dq241021a-eng.htm.txt
Context:largest drop in   2023   but remained the most likely to be impacted ( 30 % ) . 
 In
Context:( 10 % ) . Large businesses were the most likely to report incidents ( 16 % ) , followed by

Title : dq240603b-eng.htm.txt
Context:. 
 Among the self employed , women were more likely than men to be gig workers in their main job
Context:  to   24   years ) were much less likely to be self employed in general , they were much
Context:be self employed in general , they were much more likely to be gig workers in their main self employed job
Context:well as self employed workers from racialized groups were more likely to be gig workers in their main job . 

Context:an incorporated business ( 37.6 % ) were much more likely to indicate in the fourth quarter of   2023  
Context:with employees ( 38.4 % ) were also much more likely to be planning for expansion compared with self employed workers

Title : dq230214b-eng.htm.txt
Context:29   years ) ( 10 % ) were less likely to have a high perceived well being than those aged

Title : dq240228d-eng.htm.txt
Context:mortgage ( households with the highest average net worth ) likely reflects age dynamics , as older Canadians are more likely
Context:likely reflects age dynamics , as older Canadians are more likely to have paid off their mortgage , drawing from their
Context:age groups , especially among younger households who are more likely to carry larger mortgages . Younger households ( those whose

Title : dq241010a-eng.htm.txt
Context:saving and investment accounts . Lower income households are more likely to have a limited capacity to take advantage of these

Title : dq231205a-eng.htm.txt
Context:. 
 In   2023 , younger children were more likely to be on a waitlist for child care than older
Context:an average of $ 238   per month ) , likely because the majority ( 67 % ) of these parents

Title : dq240402d-eng.htm.txt
Context:2022 , women ( 7 % ) were slightly more likely to be sandwich caregivers than men ( 5 % )
Context:years ( 29 % ) . 
 Caregivers were most likely to be sandwiched between their aging parents and their children
Context:only children . Large proportions of sandwich caregivers were most likely to report feeling tired ( 69 % ) , worried
Context:seeking activities . For example , sandwich caregivers were more likely than other unpaid caregivers to have adjusted their schedule ,

Title : dq240214c-eng.htm.txt
Context:. An influx of international tourists in   2023   likely boosted attendance at sporting events and live performances . All

Title : dq240227b-eng.htm.txt
Context:  15   to   24   were the most likely to get their news and information from social media (
Context:often exposed to misinformation , but they were also more likely to see content that could incite hate or violence .
Context:  15   to   24   were the most likely of any age group to have seen content online over
Context:29 % ) were over   2.5   times as likely as young people without a disability ( 11 % )
Context:Jewish population ( 12 % ) . 
 Those mostly likely to be victims of cyber related hate crimes differ from
Context:men and boys ( 53 % ) were slightly more likely than girls and women ( 47 % ) to be
Context:aged   15   to   24   are equally likely to see content that may incite hate or violence ,
Context:for young men and women , young women are more likely to be specifically targeted . According to data from the
Context:( 11 % ) were more than three times as likely as young men ( 3 % ) to be pressured
Context:25 % ) were two and a half times as likely as men ( 10 % ) to receive unsolicited sexually
Context:messages . To protect themselves , young women were more likely to block people because of harassment or restrict their own
Context:young people who were victims of cyberaggression were also more likely to have experienced other forms of victimization , such as

Title : dq240312b-eng.htm.txt
Context:friends ( 21 % ) . Victims were far less likely to have been victimized by a stranger ( 14 %
Context:is , solved ) by police . Incidents were more likely to be cleared if they involved multiple violations . Of
Context:  30,000   charges related to sexual offences against children likely committed or facilitated online . In adult criminal court ,
Context:% ) of charges laid for sexual offences against children likely committed online resulted in a guilty finding , while just
Context:of committing an online sexual offence against children were most likely to be sentenced to probation ( 62 % ) .

Title : dq230404b-eng.htm.txt
Context:  years , those with a disability were about as likely to be married or in a common law relationship (
Context:) . However , those with a disability were less likely to have children ( 57.8 % ) than those without
Context:lowest proportion . 
 Executives with a disability were less likely to be represented in private enterprises compared with other enterprises
Context:and   2019 , executives with a disability were more likely to work in small to medium corporations ( 0.9 %

Title : dq231114a-eng.htm.txt
Context:$ 435,700 ) . Single mothers were also the most likely to have zero or negative net worth . 
 Overall
Context:net worth . 
 Overall , Indigenous families were more likely than non Indigenous families to be food insecure . At
Context:age groups , though senior led families were the least likely to experience food insecurity . In   2022 , seniors

Title : dq230920a-eng.htm.txt
Context:overqualified for their job . 
 Youth are far more likely to rent their dwelling . As of the   2021
Context:) collected in late   2022 , youth were more likely ( 60 % ) than those aged   40  
Context:aged   20   to   29   were more likely to believe that financial capacity and adequate housing would act
Context:health , with those living in the poorest households less likely to report excellent or very good mental health ( 59

Title : dq240516b-eng.htm.txt
Context:Canadians , with Canadian born Black people being significantly more likely to report having experienced discrimination ( 71 % ) than
Context:and sex . This population was also nearly twice as likely as the non 2SLGBTQ+ population to face some form of
Context:people ( 23 % ) were also nearly twice as likely to be discriminated against due to a physical or mental
Context:) . Black people were also more than twice as likely to report discrimination when seeking housing ( 13 % )
Context:% ) . 
 Conversely , Chinese people were less likely than other racialized groups to report experiencing discrimination while attending
Context:with those who did not were more than twice as likely to report fair or poor mental health ( 31 %
Context:31 % versus   14 % ) , were less likely to report high life satisfaction ( 37 % versus  
Context:37 % versus   57 % ) and were less likely to report high levels of meaning and purpose ( 46
Context:) . 
 People who experienced discrimination were also less likely to report a strong sense of belonging to their local
Context:  51 % ) . Furthermore , they were less likely to report confidence in various institutions , including the police

Title : dq230222a-eng.htm.txt
Context:Black women business owners ( 46.5 % ) were more likely to have been born in Canada than Black men business
Context:women business owners , other racialized individuals were proportionally more likely to be immigrants than their White and Black counterparts .
Context:Black owned unincorporated businesses ( 4.4 % ) were less likely to have at least one employee than those owned by

Title : dq241022b-eng.htm.txt
Context:the continued postponement of childbearing . They are also increasingly likely to be living in a common law union . 

Context:compounded by the fact that older adults today are more likely to live with a spouse or partner ( and therefore
Context:, when having a young child at home is more likely . 
 Among the   268,170   one parent families
Context:with older children in   2021   were twice as likely to be headed by one parent ( 16.3 % versus
Context:parents of young children ( 14.0 % ) were less likely to be in one parent families than other parents (
Context:to   4   ( 9.5 % ) were more likely to live with one parent and at least one grandparent

Title : dq240814a-eng.htm.txt
Context:  14   years ( 97 % ) were more likely to have seen a dental professional than younger children aged

Title : dq230531f-eng.htm.txt
Context:related disabilities who described themselves as socially connected were more likely to report positive self related general health and mental health
Context:addition , persons with mental health related disabilities were more likely to connect with friends by text message ( 68.0 %
Context:disabilities , including mental health related disabilities , were less likely ( 31.2 % ) to be socially connected compared with

Title : dq240819b-eng.htm.txt
Context:low income is higher , as young persons are more likely to be unemployed or in school , and their income

Title : dq240214b-eng.htm.txt
Context:an English language school . 
 Children were also more likely to live near a French language elementary school when parents
Context:French most often at home were nearly four times as likely ( 69 % ) to live closer to a French

Title : dq230208a-eng.htm.txt
Context:bottom income quintile were also more than three times as likely as other Canadians to report that they were very likely
Context:likely as other Canadians to report that they were very likely to obtain food or meals from a community organization over
Context:( 30 % ) were more than three times as likely as married Canadians ( 9 % ) and those living
Context:levels of assets or high levels of debt are more likely to experience hardship in the event of job or retirement

Title : dq230830a-eng.htm.txt
Context:women and men . 
 Persons with disabilities were more likely to work in the public sector than those without disabilities
Context:% for those without disabilities ) , who were more likely to leave their last job due to their own illness
Context:, men with disabilities ( 68.6 % ) were more likely to be employed than their female counterparts ( 65.7 %
Context:55   to   64 ) with disabilities were more likely to be employed than their female counterparts by a difference
Context:  2022 , persons with and without disabilities were equally likely to work part time involuntarily ( 6.5 % among persons
Context:
 In   2022 , persons with disabilities were more likely to work in the public sector ( 24.2 % ,
Context:without disabilities ) . 
 Persons with disabilities were more likely to be employed in health care and social assistance (

Title : dq241125b-eng.htm.txt
Context:and food services ( 52.0 % ) were the most likely to expect rising inflation to be an obstacle . Furthermore

Title : dq240627b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, rising to   2.9   million acres . Producers likely opted to seed more oats because of low stocks ,

Title : dq241015f-eng.htm.txt
Context:off reserve ( 23 % ) were nearly twice as likely to report having no prescription insurance coverage in the year
Context:Nations people living off reserve and Métis were significantly less likely to require medication to treat cardiovascular conditions but were more
Context:to require medication to treat cardiovascular conditions but were more likely to require medications to treat other conditions such as mental
Context:part year coverage ) were two to three times more likely to not adhere to medications because of cost than those

Title : dq230814a-eng.htm.txt
Context:to   29   ( 58 % ) were less likely than men in the same age range ( 69 %
Context:persons with a disability ( 55 % ) were less likely to be satisfied with their free time than those without
Context:previous study which found that persons with disabilities were more likely to report that they do not have time for fun

Title : dq240318e-eng.htm.txt
Context:and older , men ( 6.0 % ) were more likely to use cannabis daily than women ( 3.6 % )

Title : dq241008d-eng.htm.txt
Context:) and developmental ( 70 % ) disabilities were more likely to report unmet needs . As well , the percentage

Title : dq240212a-eng.htm.txt
Context:According to a Statistics Canada study , women were more likely than men to experience verbal abuse in the workplace ,
Context:and equipment operators and related occupations , were also more likely to experience inappropriate sexualized behaviours . 
 In another study
Context:In another study by Statistics Canada , women were more likely to experience workplace harassment and discrimination in postsecondary institutions .
Context:. Statistics Canada also reported that women were twice as likely as men to experience unwanted sexual behaviours in the workplace
Context:people , 2SLGBTQ+ workers were two to four times more likely to be targets of harassment or sexual assault in the
Context:cisgender and heterosexual counterparts . 
 Women were also more likely than men to experience harassment and sexual assault outside the
Context:, Statistics Canada reported that women were three times more likely to experience unwanted sexual behaviours in public , four times
Context:experience unwanted sexual behaviours in public , four times more likely to have been sexually assaulted since age   15  
Context:sexually assaulted since age   15   and twice as likely to experience negative emotional consequences as a result of experiencing
Context:with men . As well , women were significantly more likely than men to report experiencing all forms of intimate partner

Title : dq230220c-eng.htm.txt
Context:growing since   2018 . 
 Rural residents were more likely than urban residents to live in a place with a

Title : dq230601a-eng.htm.txt
Context:sector . 
 In Canada , larger businesses were more likely to offer bilingual services than smaller businesses . About one
Context:2.7 % ) , if any , were also least likely to be bilingual . 
 More than   4  
Context:and retail trade ( 65.2 % ) industries were more likely to offer some bilingual services or to report conducting business
Context:fishing and hunting ( 26.2 % ) were the least likely . 
 In New Brunswick , the highest proportions of

Title : dq240405c-eng.htm.txt
Context:needs ( excluding students with gifted status ) were less likely to graduate high school . However , there was diversity
Context:to   9   in   10 ) were most likely to graduate from high school , while students with intellectual
Context:to   7   in   10 ) were least likely . 
 When comparing the proportions of students graduating at
Context:and academic achievement , students with gifted status were more likely to graduate from high school than those without special needs

Title : dq231220b-eng.htm.txt
Context:an increasing challenge in separating fact from fiction were more likely to verify the accuracy of news stories they encountered .
Context:most concerned with misinformation online , they are the least likely to say that they regularly fact check ( 46 %
Context:who were either always or often lonely were just as likely to verify news and information ( 55 % ) as

Title : dq231221e-eng.htm.txt
Context:majority owned by racialized individuals , however , were less likely than all businesses to report labour related challenges . 


Title : dq240829e-eng.htm.txt
Context:an increase in the number of paid workers , most likely a result of the economy 's rebound from the COVID

Title : dq240408c-eng.htm.txt
Context:Businesses operating in these two industries were also the most likely to perform a greenhouse gas emissions inventory 81.5 % of

Title : dq230118b-eng.htm.txt
Context:
 The Daily   —   Racialized Canadians are less likely to find as good jobs as their non - racialized
Context:2023 01 18 
 Although racialized people are generally more likely than their non racialized , non Indigenous counterparts to earn
Context:a bachelor 's degree or higher , they are less likely to find jobs that offer the same pay and benefits
Context:who immigrated in   2001   or later were more likely than Canadians overall to have a bachelor 's degree or
Context:Canada with both parents born in Canada ) were less likely to obtain a bachelor 's degree or higher than Canadians

Title : dq241015e-eng.htm.txt
Context:  years , on average . Women executives were less likely to be married ( 71.2 % ) and to have
Context:( 29.6 % ) . Conversely , women were more likely to occupy lower level positions . For example , women
Context:example , women officers were   2.3   times more likely to work as a secretary than men officers and  
Context:secretary than men officers and   3.0   times more likely to be an assistant secretary . 
 After accounting for

Title : dq230331c-eng.htm.txt
Context:Japanese ( 47 % ) people in Canada were less likely to have confidence in the police , compared with those
Context:. 
 By contrast , some racialized groups were more likely to be confident in the justice system and courts .
Context:, West Asian and Korean people in Canada were more likely to have confidence in the justice system and courts (
Context:Japanese people in Canada ( 36 % ) were less likely to be confident in this institution . Recent South Asian
Context:the Canadian media . Japanese people in Canada were less likely to be confident in the Federal Parliament ( 24 %
Context:, West Asian and Korean people in Canada were more likely to have confidence in the Federal Parliament ( ranging from

Title : dq241030a-eng.htm.txt
Context:rate for older age groups , as youth are less likely to accumulate enough insurable work hours . They are also
Context:accumulate enough insurable work hours . They are also more likely to have an invalid job separation ; reasons not deemed
Context:  ( 52.2 % ) . 
 Women were more likely to have last worked in part time employment ( 31.7
Context:( 17.0 % ) . Part time workers are less likely to have accumulated enough insurable hours prior to unemployment ,

Title : dq240409a-eng.htm.txt
Context:. Immigrants admitted to Canada as children are generally more likely to participate in postsecondary education during early adulthood and report
Context:younger an immigrant child was when admitted , the more likely they were to participate in postsecondary education . 
 For
Context:  to   14   years , who were less likely to participate in postsecondary education at ages   18  

Title : dq231003b-eng.htm.txt
Context:in print . Women ( 74.3 % ) were less likely than men ( 79.9 % ) to report having a
Context:. However , women ( 44.9 % ) were more likely than men ( 40.1 % ) to report difficulties with
Context:to them . Women ( 46.2 % ) were less likely to report that they either use alternate format materials or

Title : dq241108b-eng.htm.txt
Context:( 1.6 % ) . Reduced international demand for canola likely put downward pressure on prices . In addition , canola
Context:of decline . Lower anticipated global production of palm oil likely supported a rise in prices . 
 In September ,

Title : dq240214a-eng.htm.txt
Context:in Ontario , British Columbia or Alberta were the most likely to stay in those provinces five years after their admission

Title : dq240613b-eng.htm.txt
Context:younger on average than persons born in Canada are less likely to have a disability . 
 In   2023 ,
Context:persons with a disability ( 14.4 % ) were more likely to be employed in health care and social assistance compared
Context:with a disability ( 6.8 % ) were also more likely to be employed in public administration than those without disabilities
Context:persons with a disability ( 7.9 % ) were less likely to work in the relatively high paying industry of professional

Title : dq231004b-eng.htm.txt
Context:women and girls . 
 Manslaughter charges were the most likely of any charge to result in a guilty finding in

Title : dq240213a-eng.htm.txt
Context:) . 
 People living in urban areas were more likely to report high confidence in institutions ( 28 % )
Context:language spoken most often at home . Francophones were more likely than Anglophones to report a high level of confidence in
Context:of trust . In general , young Canadians are more likely to get most of their news or information from online
Context:Canadians aged   65   years and older were more likely to rely on traditional sources such as television ( 64
Context:, clothing and other necessities . These Canadians were more likely than other Canadians who were not struggling financially to have
Context:with a disability or long term condition were also more likely to report low confidence in institutions and low trust in
Context:of disability increasing with age and older people being more likely to have confidence in institutions and trust in media .
Context:Canadians who reported high confidence in institutions were significantly more likely to be somewhat or fully aware ( 63 % )

Title : dq230614b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, in   2016 ) . These ECEAs were more likely than other ECEAs to leave the child care services industry
Context:or had at most a high school diploma were more likely than other ECEAs to leave the child care services industry
Context:that eliminating injury   or illness related work absences would likely have a limited impact on overall employee retention in the

Title : dq230718c-eng.htm.txt
Context:experience of discrimination or harassment . Indigenous people are more likely to experience these kinds of difficult challenges than their non
Context:) and Métis ( 15 % ) were significantly more likely to experience multiple serious problems than non racialized , non
Context:and First Nations people ( 1.8 % ) were more likely to have a serious problem obtaining disability assistance compared with
Context:First Nations people living off reserve and Métis were more likely to experience nearly every type of problem examined in the
Context:First Nations women ( 1.6 % ) were also more likely to experience this problem than non racialized , non Indigenous
Context:
 Additionally , Métis and First Nations people were more likely to have a serious problem regarding contact with the criminal
Context:% ) were about two and a half times more likely to experience this serious problem than non racialized , non
Context:bisexual , or any other non heterosexual orientation are more likely to experience serious problems than heterosexual people , which can
Context:. 
 People with physical or mental disabilities are more likely to experience serious problems and face more challenges in resolving

Title : dq240219b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, renters were over   15   percentage points more likely to report difficulty meeting financial needs and over   11
Context:financial needs and over   11   percentage points less likely to report high overall life satisfaction . Tenants were also
Context:report high overall life satisfaction . Tenants were also less likely to report a strong sense of belonging to their community
Context:strong sense of belonging to their community and were more likely to report feelings of loneliness . 
 Renters across Canada
Context:aged   55   or older . They were less likely to report high overall life satisfaction ( 47.2 % compared
Context:future than in previous years , and they were more likely to feel lonely than older Canadians . 
 Younger Canadians
Context:55   and over ( 74.2 % ) were more likely to own their home than those aged   15  
Context:Canadians do own their home , they 're much less likely to have paid off their mortgage ( 14.7 % )
Context:2023 , people living in Toronto and Vancouver were less likely to report a strong sense of belonging to their community
Context:) and Vancouver ( 45.1 % ) were also less likely to report high life satisfaction than elsewhere in their respective
Context:, residents of Toronto and the rest of Ontario were likely to report excellent or very good mental health , but
Context:health , but respondents living in Vancouver were significantly less likely to report excellent or very good mental health than those
Context:but residents of Vancouver ( 57.4 % ) were less likely than those living in the rest of British Columbia (

Title : dq240304a-eng.htm.txt
Context:discrimination in sport . 
 Certain population groups were more likely to experience or witness unfair treatment , racism or discrimination
Context:Canadians ( 42 % ) were more than twice as likely as heterosexuals ( 17 % ) to report having experienced
Context:
 Racialized people ( 26 % ) were also more likely than their non racialized counterparts ( 15 % ) to
Context:32 % ) people , who were among the most likely to report having experienced or witnessed these behaviours . 

Context:. However , witnesses ( 85 % ) were more likely than victims ( 64 % ) to be participants or
Context:. Meanwhile , victims ( 42 % ) were more likely than witnesses ( 25 % ) to be spectators .
Context:of discrimination . In fact , they were much more likely than referees or officials ( 10 % ) , or

Title : dq230404c-eng.htm.txt
Context:
 Looking at housing tenure , Indigenous households were less likely to own their dwelling than non Indigenous households ( 63.9
Context:Both Indigenous and non Indigenous lone parent households were more likely to be female led than male led across housing tenures
Context:, Indigenous reference persons in core housing need were more likely to report fair or poor general health ( 41.6 %
Context:Indigenous counterparts , Indigenous people were nearly three times more likely to report undrinkable water coming from faucets lasting more than

Title : dq230419d-eng.htm.txt
Context:gay or lesbian people ( 38.0 % ) were more likely to hold a bachelor 's degree or higher when compared

Title : dq221221g-eng.htm.txt
Context:old age group , those with Indigenous identity were less likely to have visited an eye care professional than those without

Title : dq231030b-eng.htm.txt
Context:furnaces and boilers ) . Higher income households were more likely to report using heat pumps ; about   9 %
Context:them having used this type of heating system . This likely reflects their higher likelihood of living in apartments , relative
Context:Renters ( 17 % ) were also six times as likely as homeowners ( 3 % ) to be unsure about
Context:those in the lowest income quintile . The households most likely to go without air conditioning lived in low rise apartments
Context:. They were more than   1.5   times as likely to face this situation than couples with children ( 16
Context:16 % ) and over   3   times as likely as couples without children ( 8 % ) . 


Title : dq221205b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, recent immigrants , especially immigrant women , were more likely than their Canadian born counterparts to transition out of employment
Context:pandemic lockdowns . As a result , immigrants were more likely to apply for the Canadian Emergency Response Benefit in  
Context:, this group earned the lowest median entry wages , likely because they were still pursuing studies and working part time

Title : dq240815b-eng.htm.txt
Context:( 8 % ) or somewhat ( 15 % ) likely to obtain food or meals from community organizations over the
Context:Renters and owners in the highest income quintile were less likely than those in lower income quintiles to report having this
Context:% ) reported their household as being somewhat or very likely to do so . However , many Canadians in higher
Context:25   to   44   years were also more likely to report having high financial stress ( ranging from  
Context:experiencing greater financial difficulty , households with children were more likely to report having financial difficulties in spring   2024  
Context:. 
 Similarly , households with children were also more likely to describe most days as stressful due to financial issues
Context:that lone parent families and other family types were more likely to experience financial distress ( e.g. , use payday loans
Context:identified as a person with a disability were consistently more likely to report having financial concerns regarding rising prices compared with
Context:  2023 , and persons with a disability were more likely to live in poverty in   2020 . Rising prices
Context:. Furthermore , people experiencing greater financial stress are more likely to report having poorer quality of life . 
 Further

Title : dq221208a-eng.htm.txt
Context:results released today show that these two populations were less likely to have tested positive for COVID 19   since the
Context:. 
 Canadians with chronic conditions or cancer were less likely to have tested positive for the virus than those without
Context:people most at risk of severe outcomes may be more likely to adopt measures to protect themselves . 
 Through its

Title : dq241118d-eng.htm.txt
Context:the booking and the time of the appointment were less likely to have indicated that they could have accommodated additional patient

Title : dq230529b-eng.htm.txt
Context:in previous years , women in leadership positions were less likely to occupy top officer positions . In   2020 ,
Context:other officer positions . 
 Women top officers were most likely to be executive vice presidents ( 27.8 % ) and
Context:be executive vice presidents ( 27.8 % ) and least likely to contribute in the role of chairperson ( 1.3 %

Title : dq230309a-eng.htm.txt
Context:to online child pornography ( 5 % ) were less likely to proceed to court than other online sexual offences against

Title : dq240912a-eng.htm.txt
Context:in nominal consumption expenditure . A portion of these savings likely bolstered holdings of currency and deposits , as households added

Title : dq230328d-eng.htm.txt
Context:2021 . 
 For music publishers , pandemic related restrictions likely reduced demand , at least temporarily , for licensed music

Title : dq231122b-eng.htm.txt
Context:with Canadian born mothers ( 75 % ) were more likely to have two earners than those with immigrant mothers (
Context:principal applicant had no university degree at landing were more likely to file ( 91 % ) than those with a

Title : dq240131b-eng.htm.txt
Context:work more than other workers . They were also more likely to use both official languages at work . 
 These
Context:home based workers ( 81.7 % ) were slightly more likely than other workers ( 75.6 % ) to use English
Context:% ) in the Montréal CMA were nearly twice as likely to work primarily in English as other workers ( 16.8
Context:, home based workers ( 66.7 % ) remained less likely than other workers ( 71.6 % ) to use French

Title : dq240708a-eng.htm.txt
Context:  15   to   24   years were more likely to have a mental health related ( 84.1 % )
Context:  34   years ( 77.9 % ) were more likely to experience barriers than their non 2SLGBTQ+ counterparts ( 63.9
Context:64   years , 2SLGBTQ+ persons with disabilities were more likely to have a bachelor 's degree or higher than non
Context:higher than non 2SLGBTQ+ persons with disabilities , and less likely to have post secondary education below a bachelor 's degree

Title : dq241118f-eng.htm.txt
Context:average , almost one fifth ( 18.4 % ) more likely to exit the market compared with non Indigenous owned businesses

Title : dq240716b-eng.htm.txt
Context:  and   3.1   times , respectively , more likely to die from COVID 19   than those in higher
Context:Nations people living on reserve were more than twice as likely to die of COVID 19   compared with First Nations
Context:important , as First Nations people and Métis are more likely to experience social vulnerabilities and risk factors for COVID 19

Title : dq230627b-eng.htm.txt
Context:the pay gap between men with and without disabilities , likely due to women with and without disabilities earning less than
Context:, among employed persons , persons with disabilities were less likely to work full time ( 76.9 % ) than persons
Context:In addition , persons with and without disabilities were equally likely to be permanently employed , but the disability pay gap

Title : dq230620b-eng.htm.txt
Context:English or French . While asylum claimants were the least likely NPR type to know an official language , the proportion
Context:% ) . 
 NPRs were almost nine times as likely as the rest of the Canadian population to be living
Context:had the lowest overqualification rate . They were also more likely to have worked the full year and full time .

Title : dq230221c-eng.htm.txt
Context:  12   to   17   years were equally likely to experience cybervictimization , non binary youth had a significantly
Context:women ( 22 % ) were almost three times as likely to be targeted as young men ( 8 % )
Context:Overall , young adults who have been cybervictimized were more likely to be victims of fraud , more likely to have
Context:were more likely to be victims of fraud , more likely to have been stalked and more likely to have been
Context:fraud , more likely to have been stalked and more likely to have been physically or sexually assaulted in the past

Title : dq241029a-eng.htm.txt
Context:. Canadian families with low net worth will be more likely to need to work longer , may need more government

Title : dq230921b-eng.htm.txt
Context:out earned Canadian born men by   7 % , likely because of their higher incidence in professional occupations in health
Context:increased by   15   months since   2007 , likely the result of a smaller proportion of them being employed
Context:who landed as children ( 34 % ) were more likely to work in professional occupations than Indigenous women ( 23
Context:who landed as adults ( 35 % ) were more likely to work in the five lowest paid occupations than Canadian
Context:who landed as children ( 21 % ) were more likely to work in professional , scientific and technical service industries

Title : dq240206b-eng.htm.txt
Context:bilingual labour , local clients or business partners are more likely to express themselves in either official language , creating greater

Title : dq240826a-eng.htm.txt
Context:and Black ( 64.5 % ) commuters were much less likely to mainly travel to work in a car , truck
Context:workers who mostly work from home were over twice as likely to take public transit ( 25.5 % ) as commuters
Context:workers working most of their hours from home were less likely to commute on their in office days using a car
Context:) and Hamilton ( 13.8 % ) were also more likely to have a long commute . 
 For more information

Title : dq230724b-eng.htm.txt
Context:retail trade ( 82.9 % ) were among the most likely to be somewhat or very optimistic about their future outlook

Title : dq240911b-eng.htm.txt
Context:mothers in one parent families who never married were less likely to be employed , despite double digit increases in their
Context:Canadian born ) . In general , they are less likely to be employed than Canadian born mothers in a couple
Context:reflecting the finding that mothers in a couple are more likely than never married mothers to hold a bachelor 's degree
Context:in a couple ( 17 % ) , and less likely to work in higher paying professional positions ( 16 %

Title : dq240306a-eng.htm.txt
Context:( 13.5 % of total sales ) were the most likely to buy ciders and coolers , while those of Quebec
Context:those of Quebec ( 2.2 % ) were the least likely to do so . 
 Total spirit sales rose  
Context:in the province . Prince Edward Island 's growth is likely due to an increase in the availability of inhaled extract

Title : dq240909b-eng.htm.txt
Context:% to a record   11.5   million tonnes , likely in response to increased demand for renewable energy . 

Context:in higher ending stocks . 
 Canola exports were down likely due to lower global demand caused by competition from soybean
Context:% to   934   700   tonnes ) , likely because of lower total supply . 
 For more information

Title : dq221209c-eng.htm.txt
Context:areas . Therefore , understanding where arson incidents have been likely to occur can help to target intervention programs . 

Context:2012   to   2021 , arson incidents were more likely to occur on weekends ( 32 % happened on a
Context:than on any individual weekday . They were also more likely to occur in the evening or at night , with
Context:with other property crimes , arson incidents were also more likely to occur during the spring or summer months , with
Context:victims aged   65   years and older were more likely to sustain minor injuries ( 38 % versus   15
Context:Coroner and Medical Examiner Database , older people are more likely to die in unintentional ( accidental ) residential fires .
Context:and girls ( 41 % ) were nearly twice as likely to have a current or former familial or intimate relationship
Context:. 
 In contrast , men and boys were more likely to have been victimized by a stranger ( 30 %
Context:2020 , those that were gang related were much less likely to be cleared ( meaning solved ) . Three quarters

Title : dq240118c-eng.htm.txt
Context:  2023   is , on an annual basis , likely lower than   12 % . 
 The product "

Title : dq240917c-eng.htm.txt
Context:  2021 . 
 While AI technologies were much less likely to be used than many other ICTs overall in  
Context:, large businesses ( 26 % ) were the most likely to use AI technologies in   2023 , with the
Context:the information and cultural industries sector were also the most likely to use cloud computing ( 81 % ) in  

Title : dq241023b-eng.htm.txt
Context:of problems with their mouth . Some populations are more likely to report problems with their mouth than others , including
Context:older ( 29 % ) were more than twice as likely as children and youth aged   0   to  
Context:those living in other countries , Canadian seniors were less likely to have lost all their natural teeth . According to
Context:problems . Previous analysis has shown that Canadians are more likely to see an oral health professional and get care when
Context:show that Canadians with lower family income were significantly more likely to experience mouth pain and avoid certain foods because of
Context:without access to dental insurance were more than twice as likely to avoid certain foods because of mouth problems as those
Context:Furthermore , people with disabilities were more than twice as likely to avoid certain foods because of mouth problems ( 31
Context:reported being current or former smokers were nearly twice as likely ( 7 % ) to report having lost all their
Context:, despite reporting more oral health problems , were more likely to brush their teeth at least twice a day (

Title : dq240426b-eng.htm.txt
Context:from   22,543   to   33,293 . Multiple factors likely contributed to this increase , including the definition change for

Title : dq231204a-eng.htm.txt
Context:2023 , attributable to lower production in the Prairies , likely because of dry conditions . Lower yields ( 12.1 %
Context:12.9 % to   61.3   bushels per acre , likely because of dry conditions in parts of the Prairies .
Context:million acres as farmers opted to plant less oats , likely because of high production in   2022 . Yields also

Title : dq240527b-eng.htm.txt
Context:( 11 % ) . Similarly , men were more likely than women to report exposure to fire or explosions (
Context:to more than one type of traumatic event were more likely to report moderate to severe symptoms of PTSD . Among

Title : dq241106a-eng.htm.txt
Context:the incident and it being reported to police are more likely than for other types of violent crime . This has
Context:lower charge rates ( 28 % ) but were more likely to continue to court ( 69 % ) and result
Context:from   2015   to   2019   were less likely to result in charges , less likely to proceed to
Context:  were less likely to result in charges , less likely to proceed to court , less likely to result in
Context:charges , less likely to proceed to court , less likely to result in a guilty finding and less likely to
Context:less likely to result in a guilty finding and less likely to result in a sentence of custody . 
 The

