Title : dq231211b-eng.htm.txt
Context:home . People who spoke only French or English most often at home were less likely to change their linguistic behaviour
Context:  2.1 % of people who spoke only English most often at home five years prior to the survey and  
Context:  2.8 % of people who spoke only French most often at home . 
 In the general population ,  
Context:( 5.0 % ) changed the language they spoke most often at home in the five years prior to the survey
Context:the population who spoke only a non official language most often at home five years prior to the survey were immigrants
Context:of the changes to the language or languages spoken most often at home in the five years prior to the survey
Context:of immigrants who spoke only a non official language most often at home five years preceding the survey began using English
Context:home five years preceding the survey began using English most often at home or speaking English at home equally with their
Context:than   0.1 % of immigrants began using French most often at home or speaking French at home equally with their
Context:or added it to their non official language spoken most often at home , while   4 % began using English
Context:or added it to their non official language spoken most often at home in the five years preceding the survey .
Context:of immigrants who spoke only a non official language most often at home and were living in another country five years
Context:around   340,000   people ) who spoke English most often at home five years prior to the survey began speaking
Context:the survey began speaking or added another language spoken most often at home . In almost   90 % of cases
Context:or spoke a non official language along with English most often at home . Roughly   10 % began speaking French
Context:home . Roughly   10 % began speaking French most often at home or added French to English as their language
Context:or added French to English as their language spoken most often at home . 
 In Quebec , about   100,000
Context:% of the population ) who spoke only French most often at home made a change to their language behaviour in
Context:60 % of cases , they began speaking English most often at home , or added English to French as their
Context:or added English to French as their language spoken most often at home . In more than   40 % of
Context:non official language to French as their language spoken most often at home . 
 People who spoke only the official
Context:who spoke only the official language of the minority most often at home French in Canada outside Quebec and English in
Context:( approximately   65,000 ) who spoke only French most often at home five years prior to the survey began speaking
Context:to the survey began speaking English or spoke it most often at home along with French . 
 Approximately   54,000
Context:the population ) in Quebec who spoke only English most often at home five years prior to the survey began speaking
Context:to the survey began speaking French or spoke it most often at home along with English . Roughly   21,000  
Context:or added it to English as their language spoken most often at home . 
 In both Quebec and the rest
Context:language behaviours at home involved changing the language spoken most often at home most often , shifting from a non official
Context:involved changing the language spoken most often at home most often , shifting from a non official language to English ,
Context:a language being added to the one already spoken most often at home ; in most cases , English was added
Context:there was a decrease from two languages spoken equally most often at home five years prior to the survey to one
Context:years prior to the survey to one language spoken most often at home . In these cases , English was dropped
Context:cases , English was dropped as the language spoken most often at home almost as often as a non official language
Context:as the language spoken most often at home almost as often as a non official language . 
 In Quebec ,
Context:prior to the survey involved changing the language spoken most often at home for another one most often , from English
Context:language spoken most often at home for another one most often , from English to French . 
 Moreover , more
Context:of the changes consisted in adding a language spoken most often at home , with English primarily being added to French
Context:seventh of changes involved one of the languages spoken most often at home five years prior to the survey being dropped
Context:dropped . A non official language was dropped almost as often as French . 
 The Canadian Social Survey also revealed
Context:revealed that the likelihood to change the language spoken most often at home decreases with age . 
 The proportion of
Context:34   years changed the language or languages spoken most often at home in the five years prior to the survey

Title : dq230515b-eng.htm.txt
Context:fatalities ( 73 % ) occurred more than twice as often as single vehicle fatalities ( 27 % ) . Multi
Context:driving in Canada that found that impaired drivers were most often men and young adults . 
 While the time of
Context:, alcohol , cannabis and other drug consumption was more often reported among motorcycle fatalities occurring at night , from  
Context:( 26 % ) . Substance consumption was also more often reported among single vehicle fatalities ( 42 % ) than

Title : dq240403a-eng.htm.txt
Context:degree of trade with the rest of the world . Often forgotten in the discussion is the critical importance of internal

Title : dq231208a-eng.htm.txt
Context:, for many others , symptoms persist for months , often impacting their ability to work and their quality of life
Context:in   5   ( 21.7 % ) reported being often or always limited by them in their daily activities .

Title : dq240321b-eng.htm.txt
Context:Similarly , those with lower levels of education were more often without Internet access :   15 % of those with
Context:Indeed , there is a link between language spoken most often at home and online banking . Just over three quarters

Title : dq240412c-eng.htm.txt
Context:in the media as " renovictions " and the term often has negative connotations . 
 But it is important to
Context:end result for evictions for major repairs or renovations is often the same : existing tenants are replaced with tenants who

Title : dq240725b-eng.htm.txt
Context:violent crime that involves obtaining property through coercion and is often associated with fraud . The rate of police reported extortion

Title : dq240618b-eng.htm.txt
Context:economic contraction equally . Recent immigrants , for example , often report experiencing income related challenges , which may affect their
Context:as those admitted in   2005   or after ) often face unique economic challenges in adapting to a new country

Title : dq231201b-eng.htm.txt
Context:common among seniors with disabilities . 
 Persons with disabilities often have multiple co occurring disability types . In   2022

Title : dq240910a-eng.htm.txt
Context:between parent and youth perspectives on mental health . Parents often rated their child 's mental health more positively than the
Context:optimism toward school while youth were directly asked about how often they looked forward to school . Options included " Never
Context:included " Never " , " Sometimes " , " Often " and " Always " . 
 Results showed that
Context:  16 % of parents who reported their child as often or always looking forward to school in   2019 ,
Context:( 49 % ) of those who felt like they often or always looked forward to school in   2019 ,

Title : dq241104a-eng.htm.txt
Context:reported being satisfied or very satisfied . 
 Indigenous people often face barriers to health care that contribute to health disparities

Title : dq240405d-eng.htm.txt
Context:and on first official language spoken and language spoken most often at home for the period going from   1971  

Title : dq231204b-eng.htm.txt
Context:providers . In comparison , self employed men were most often in historically male dominated occupations , with home building and
Context:as managers in agriculture and as transport truck drivers more often than women . 
 That said , there has been

Title : dq231129b-eng.htm.txt
Context:82 % ) were committed with a firearm , most often a handgun ( 70 % ) . Gang related homicides

Title : dq240223b-eng.htm.txt
Context:conditions of release imposed by the court . This can often result in a repeated cycle of administration of justice convictions

Title : dq230619c-eng.htm.txt
Context:The Daily   —   Work - related stress most often caused by heavy workloads and work - life balance 

Context:industry . For example , work related stress was more often reported by women than men in educational services ( 27.0

Title : dq231027a-eng.htm.txt
Context:barriers to pursuing higher levels of formal education , they often benefit from a closer connection to their communities , cultures

Title : dq241126b-eng.htm.txt
Context:% for properties with multiple residential units , which are often houses with a laneway or basement suite in British Columbia

Title : dq241024b-eng.htm.txt
Context:Past research has highlighted that these types of violence are often not reported to authorities . Younger and older victims that
Context:five victims ( 62 % ) were girls . Most often , family violence against children and youth was perpetrated by
Context:10   ( 57 % ) were women . Most often , family violence against seniors was perpetrated by their child
Context:( 27 % ) . While senior women were more often victimized by a spouse ( 31 % ) than another

Title : dq231030a-eng.htm.txt
Context:lots or on private property ( 10 % ) were often the result of a vehicle reversing and colliding with the
Context:drug consumption by the pedestrian or the driver was more often reported among pedestrian fatalities occurring at night , from  

Title : dq231017c-eng.htm.txt
Context:irrigation . As in   2020 , farm operations most often used sprinkler irrigation methods to irrigate their crops in  

Title : dq240627h-eng.htm.txt
Context:it facilitates S&T activities through its departments , which are often guided through federal fiscal budgets , as well as the

Title : dq241101a-eng.htm.txt
Context:. Human trafficking can take on many forms , most often sexual exploitation or forced labour . 
 Official statistics ,
Context:have been trafficked by a stranger . Victims were most often trafficked by an intimate partner ( 34 % ) or

Title : dq231010b-eng.htm.txt
Context:lack of interest ( 35 % ) was the most often cited by respondents as a reason for not playing sports
Context:people who did not play sports . This was more often cited by Koreans ( 20 % ) , West Asians

Title : dq240315c-eng.htm.txt
Context:pandemic , globalization and participation in global supply chains were often associated with economic benefits . However , the pandemic and

Title : dq240522b-eng.htm.txt
Context:respective provinces . Those net losses from large CMAs are often reflected as net gains in smaller municipalities in their periphery

Title : dq231205a-eng.htm.txt
Context:in   2023 . 
 Difficulties in finding child care often resulted in negative impacts on the working life of families

Title : dq230203a-eng.htm.txt
Context:. 
 Condominium apartments were used as an investment more often than houses ( single detached houses , semi detached houses

Title : dq240412b-eng.htm.txt
Context:carriers were hit harder in   2021 , as they often transport specific commodities or serve specific industries . However ,

Title : dq240227b-eng.htm.txt
Context:overall ) . 
 Not only were young people more often exposed to misinformation , but they were also more likely
Context:cyber related hate crimes differ from those who were most often the target of cyberbullying . Young women and girls were
Context:target of cyberbullying . Young women and girls were more often the target of online bullying and abuse , especially of
Context:of cyber related hate crimes reported to police were more often male , and typically younger . From   2018  
Context:harassing victims . These forms of online harms were more often directed at young women . For instance , while the

Title : dq240320e-eng.htm.txt
Context:criminal , such as emotional abuse . Because dating violence often goes unreported to police and because not all abusive behaviours

Title : dq230920a-eng.htm.txt
Context:to   29   have consistently reported feeling lonely more often than those in older age groups . 
 These challenges
Context:,   81 % of Canadian youth reported always or often having people to depend on when they need it .

Title : dq240516b-eng.htm.txt
Context:with   30 % of men . Women were more often discriminated against because of their sex or age , while
Context:or age , while for men , discrimination was more often on the basis of their race or skin colour ,
Context:discrimination ( 66 % ) reported that they always or often had someone they could depend on , this was lower

Title : dq240214b-eng.htm.txt
Context:children with at least one parent who spoke French most often at home ( 92 % ) and among those who
Context:children with at least one parent who spoke French most often at home were nearly four times as likely ( 69
Context:closest to the family home , the language spoken most often at home by parents was the factor most strongly associated
Context:language school when at least one parent spoke French most often at home , compared with less than one third (

Title : dq230208a-eng.htm.txt
Context:in the bottom income quintile reported that they had to often borrow money from friends or relatives or take on additional

Title : dq241104b-eng.htm.txt
Context:. Non profit organizations do not distribute surpluses which is often the case when the aim of the co operative is

Title : dq240429a-eng.htm.txt
Context:2022 . 
 The management of companies and enterprises sector often large corporate groups that are recipients of foreign direct investments
Context:. Some countries , notably the Netherlands and Luxembourg , often act as intermediaries through which investors channel their investment to

Title : dq230814a-eng.htm.txt
Context:time use . Living with a long term illness can often require individuals to spend more time on personal care ,

Title : dq240318e-eng.htm.txt
Context:dried leaf or flower and edible cannabis , and they often prefer legal cannabis sources because of product safety . 


Title : dq231220b-eng.htm.txt
Context:news stories . Another   36 % stated that they often fact check , and   32 % said that they
Context:% ) . Some , however , felt it was often too challenging to verify content , with   8 %
Context:Canadians with low levels of trust in media always or often verified information , compared to   51 % with a
Context:, and   54 % for people who always or often had a hopeful outlook of the future . 
 Fact
Context:. That is , Canadians who were either always or often lonely were just as likely to verify news and information

Title : dq240304b-eng.htm.txt
Context:or system that can connect workers directly with clients and often include coordination functions , such as algorithms to match workers

Title : dq231003b-eng.htm.txt
Context:Canada , the   6.2   million persons with disabilities often experience challenges related to accessibility in their daily lives .

Title : dq230828c-eng.htm.txt
Context:population ( 92 % ) . Chinese people said less often that they thought the police do a good job for

Title : dq231004b-eng.htm.txt
Context:girls resulted in charges of manslaughter instead of murder more often than when the victims were non Indigenous women or girls
Context:court stages , homicides involving Indigenous women and girls more often resulted in less serious homicide charges such as manslaughter .

Title : dq240213a-eng.htm.txt
Context:Confidence and trust levels also varied by language spoken most often at home . Francophones were more likely than Anglophones to
Context:who speak a language other than English or French most often at home had the highest likelihood of reporting high confidence
Context:of confidence , while still relatively common , was less often seen among people with excellent or very good mental health

Title : dq230823b-eng.htm.txt
Context:children or adolescents and lived with their immigrant parents and often with their grandparents as well . The high prevalence of

Title : dq240219b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, the proportion of people who reported being always or often hopeful about the future was similar in Toronto ( 58.8
Context:British Columbia ( 58.9 % ) to report always or often being hopeful about the future . 
 One factor that

Title : dq240304a-eng.htm.txt
Context:experienced or witnessed these behaviours . 
 The motivation most often cited by victims and witnesses in incidents of discrimination was
Context:coaches and instructors ( 36 % ) were also most often responsible for acts of discrimination . In fact , they

Title : dq241003a-eng.htm.txt
Context:wary of purchasing pre construction condominium apartment units because they often lose money relative to mortgage payments on existing rented units
Context:CMA . In these CMAs , new condominium apartment projects often rely on presales to investors to be built . Investors

Title : dq240808a-eng.htm.txt
Context:20 % ) who died in a fire were more often involved in residential fires causing two or more deaths than

Title : dq240611b-eng.htm.txt
Context:experience on labour productivity . Growth in multifactor productivity is often associated with technological change , organizational change or economies of

Title : dq231030b-eng.htm.txt
Context:. 
 Similarly , renters ( 52 % ) more often reported electric forms of heating than homeowners ( 27 %
Context:of unaffordable heating or cooling costs . This was more often the case for the lowest income households ,   18

Title : dq221208a-eng.htm.txt
Context:on the survey allows for a better understanding of how often infections go undetected or unsuspected by Canadians . 
 There
Context:results from the saliva based PCR test to understand how often Canadians were unaware of a SARS CoV 2   infection

Title : dq230309a-eng.htm.txt
Context:police reported incidents where men and boys were accused more often resulted in charges being laid or recommended by police ,
Context:with younger victims and accused friends or family members more often ended in a guilty finding for a sexual offence .

Title : dq230627b-eng.htm.txt
Context:27 
 Employment and income experiences for persons with disabilities often differ from persons without disabilities . Barriers to accessibility within
Context:persons without disabilities . Barriers to accessibility within these areas often lead to lower employment rates and decreased income levels for

Title : dq230620b-eng.htm.txt
Context:NPRs with a work permit only , who were most often aged   25   to   34   years ,
Context:the rest of the population . Asylum claimants were more often in trades , transport and equipment operators and related occupations
Context:than the rest of the population , they were more often in occupations requiring no formal education ( 23.7 % )

Title : dq230221c-eng.htm.txt
Context:years , young women ( 32 % ) were more often the target of online abuse , with a prevalence almost

Title : dq240416b-eng.htm.txt
Context:in the production process . Growth in multifactor productivity is often associated with technological change , organizational change or economies of

Title : dq230913d-eng.htm.txt
Context:soil eroded per hectare per year . 
 Pesticides are often used to control organisms that hinder crop growth . Pesticides

Title : dq240917d-eng.htm.txt
Context:a deeper understanding of the diverse labour markets , which often encompass both cities and rural areas with distinct economic dynamics

Title : dq221209c-eng.htm.txt
Context:unique incidents accounted for   27 % of victims . Often , these incidents involve larger , shared dwellings such as
Context:2012   to   2021 , violent arson incidents most often occurred in private dwellings ( 73 % ) , while
Context:result , in these gang related homicides , fire was often deployed for a reason other than to kill the victim
Context:. 
 Fire related homicides involving gang activity occurred more often in a non residential location ( 58 % ) .

Title : dq241101c-eng.htm.txt
Context:spending plays a pivotal role in shaping regional innovation ecosystems often with significant impacts on local economies . 
 Regionally ,

Title : dq240925a-eng.htm.txt
Context:work permit holders , some of which are traditionally more often held by men , such as jobs in the agricultural

Title : dq241023b-eng.htm.txt
Context:) Canadians reported persistent pain in their mouth sometimes or often in the   12   months prior to the survey
Context:the avoidance of certain foods , which was reported more often among current daily smokers ( 21 % ) compared with

Title : dq240426b-eng.htm.txt
Context:, this is particularly relevant because of the challenges that often exist in obtaining evidence for this type of crime .

Title : dq230712c-eng.htm.txt
Context:New historical tables on mother tongue , language spoken most often at home and first official language spoken 
 Article Content
Context:to   2021 , a table on language spoken most often at home for the census years   1971   to

Title : dq241106a-eng.htm.txt
Context:. For instance , charges were laid or recommended more often when the victim was a woman or girl ( 38

