Date:
2022-12-08
Article Title:
The Daily — Canadians' awareness of when they have COVID-19, May to August 2022
Article Content:
Released: 2022 12 08
The COVID 19 pandemic continues to impact the daily lives of Canadians as the country enters its third winter of the pandemic. Statistics Canada, in partnership with the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and Canada's COVID 19 Immunity Task Force (CITF), conducted a second cycle of the Canadian COVID 19 Antibody and Health Survey to better understand the spread and long term impacts of COVID 19. This unique survey combines self reported information about past and current infections with physical measures obtained from testing a representative sample of Canadians for the virus using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, as well as a test to detect antibodies from vaccination and infection. This combined information on the survey allows for a better understanding of how often infections go undetected or unsuspected by Canadians.
There are a number of data sources that have been used to monitor the rates of COVID 19 infection since the start of the pandemic. Available national data on reported cases of COVID 19 collected by the PHAC through the provinces and territories focuses on people who tested positive for SARS CoV 2, the virus that causes COVID 19, generally based on a PCR test, and who reported the results to public health authorities. The PCR test is currently considered the "gold standard" test for detecting infection from the virus and is generally done in testing centres or in the presence of health care professionals. While these data have allowed for a better understanding of the rise and decline of confirmed cases across Canada, it is important to note that they do not account for all Canadians who have been infected. For example, with the emergence of the Omicron variant, there was an increase in the use of rapid antigen tests (RAT), from which results are not usually reported to health authorities. Lastly, not everyone who acquired COVID 19 may have been aware or tested, particularly if they did not experience any symptoms.
Today's provisional release focuses on results from saliva based PCR tests which were collected from May 10 to August 31, 2022. The results show that, on average, on any given day throughout summer 2022, the virus was detectable in approximately 1 in every 50 Canadians aged 18 years and older, indicating a current or recent infection. Among them, about one third (35%) were not aware that they had the virus. When individuals were aware of their infection, most relied on the results from a RAT during this time.
As part of the survey, a representative sample of Canadians aged 18 years and older were tested for SARS CoV 2 using a saliva based PCR test, regardless of whether they had symptoms or not. A positive test indicates a current or recent infection at the time of testing. It is important to note that an individual can test positive for an extended period of time and that a positive test result does not necessarily imply the individual is still sick or infectious.
According to the provisional results, 1.8% of Canadian adults would have tested positive if they took a test for SARS CoV 2 on any given day from May to August 2022. This means that about 420,000 to 650,000 Canadian adults were either infected or recently infected with the virus on any given day during this period. As individuals can test positive for the same infection over many days, this figure is necessarily higher than the number of new infections per day over the same period. 
The survey included questions about whether Canadians had ever tested positive for the virus or whether they suspected that they ever had it. This information was combined with results from the saliva based PCR test to understand how often Canadians were unaware of a SARS CoV 2 infection and thus may not have changed their behaviour to limit the spread to others.
Provisional results found that 35% of people who had a current or recent infection indicated that they had never tested positive or suspected having the virus, indicating that they were unaware of their infection.
As previously reported, the RAT became the principal way Canadians tested positive in January 2022. This continued through the summer and, among those with a current or recent infection from May to August, many knew they had the virus because of a recent positive test result. Almost three quarters (74.0%) of people obtained their result from a RAT compared with 26.0% who received confirmation from a PCR test.
It is possible that people who recovered from a COVID 19 infection can become infected again. In this study, 14.4% of those who showed detectable amounts of the virus from May to August 2022 reported that they had tested positive for COVID 19 more than three months earlier. While this figure should not necessarily be interpreted as the percentage of reinfections, given that it is possible for someone to still test positive on a PCR test beyond 90 days after their infection, it does provide some evidence that reinfections have occurred.
The PHAC continues to provide guidance to Canadians on how to reduce the spread of SARS CoV 2, including recommendations to limit close contacts where possible when suspecting an infection. Some guidance from public health authorities has been specifically aimed at those most vulnerable to severe health outcomes, including older Canadians and those with underlying health conditions. The self reported provisional results released today show that these two populations were less likely to have tested positive for COVID 19 since the start of the pandemic. By June 2022, 13.6% of those aged 65 years and older living in private dwellings reported having tested positive for the virus at least once since the start of the pandemic, compared with 24.7% of those aged 50 to 64 years, 34.0% of those aged 35 to 49 years, and 34.5% of those aged 18 to 34 years.
Canadians with chronic conditions or cancer were less likely to have tested positive for the virus than those without. Of Canadians with no chronic conditions or cancer, 30.2% reported testing positive at least once by June 2022, compared with 26.6% of those with one chronic condition or cancer and 21.9% of those with two or more chronic conditions or cancer. These provisional results suggest that the people most at risk of severe outcomes may be more likely to adopt measures to protect themselves.
Through its partnership with the PHAC and the CITF, Statistics Canada is committed to expanding the understanding of COVID 19 by continuing to publish the most recent information available from the survey. Future results, including direct measures of antibodies from vaccination and past infection, will be released in early 2023.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
