Date:
2023-03-20
Article Title:
The Daily — Labour characteristics of women by the relative remoteness of their communities
Article Content:
Released: 2023 03 20
Women's economic participation and prosperity have increased substantially over the past decades. Yet, disparities continue to exist, both between women and men, and between diverse groups of women, including between women living in more accessible areas of Canada and those living in more remote areas.
A new study released today uses 2016 Census of Population data and the updated Remoteness Index Classification to assess the labour characteristics of diverse groups of women (i.e., Indigenous, immigrant and racialized women) living in communities of different degrees of remoteness. This report is the fourth and final report in a series on the socioeconomic and sociodemographic profile of women living in communities at varying levels of remoteness. It focuses on women's employment and unemployment rates, employment in full time jobs, representation in industries and occupations, and employment income.
Overall, the results show that women's labour characteristics varied according to both the level of remoteness of their communities and their characteristics. For example, women's employment rates varied from one remoteness area to another depending on characteristics, such as Indigenous identity, immigrant status and racialized group.
In 2016, more than 7 in 10 women (72.3%) aged 25 to 64 years in easily accessible areas were employed. As the areas became more remote, the employment rate decreased, reaching 55.5% in very remote areas.
Although the pattern described above held true for Indigenous women, it did not for immigrant and racialized women, especially South Asian, Chinese and Black women. For example, 78.3% of Chinese women and 74.2% of South Asian women in remote areas were employed in 2016, compared with less than two thirds of Chinese women (65.7%) and South Asian women (63.7%) in easily accessible areas.
The report "Portrait of Women by the Relative Remoteness of their Communities, Series 4: Labour Characteristics," as part of Studies on Gender and Intersecting Identities (45 20 0002), is now available.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
