Date:
2023-10-27
Article Title:
The Daily — Postsecondary educational attainment and labour market outcomes of Indigenous peoples, 2021
Article Content:
Released: 2023 10 27
Indigenous people have made important gains in higher education from 2016 to 2021, with the share of Indigenous people holding a bachelor's degree or higher increasing by 1.9 percentage points over that period. Increases were seen across all Indigenous groups, namely First Nations people, Métis and Inuit. This corresponded with better labour market outcomes compared to Indigenous people with lower levels of educational attainment.
Despite these educational gains and related advantages in the labour market, significant gaps remain when compared to the non Indigenous population. These gaps in educational attainment and labour market outcomes are most notable among Indigenous people living in very remote areas, that is, further away from population centres. Although Indigenous people living in more remote areas may face additional barriers to pursuing higher levels of formal education, they often benefit from a closer connection to their communities, cultures, traditions, languages, lands, and resources.
Released today, a new study using data from the 2021 Census examines postsecondary educational attainment and labour market outcomes among First Nations, Métis and Inuit adults aged 25 to 64 years, examining variations by gender, and among those residing in remote areas, on reserve, and communities across Inuit Nunangat. Examining educational attainment and labour market outcomes by geography can help inform the development of infrastructure, policies and programs which aim to improve both access to higher education and employment opportunities. 
According to the 2021 Census, just under half (49.2%) of Indigenous people aged 25 to 64 years had completed a postsecondary qualification, with the most common being the completion of a college, CEGEP, or other non university certificate or diploma. The overall rates of postsecondary completion were 45.3% for First Nations people, 56.3% for Métis and 33.6% among Inuit. These rates were below those recorded for the non Indigenous population, at 68.0%. 
In 2021, Indigenous women (53.5%) were more likely than Indigenous men (44.4%) to have completed a postsecondary qualification. 
First Nations people, Métis and Inuit are more likely to live in certain geographic regions, which can impact their participation in formal education. In particular, educational attainment is related to level of remoteness, which describes the extent to which a municipality is remote, or far from neighbouring population centres (see the "Classification of remoteness index" box).
The share of Indigenous people with a postsecondary qualification was higher in more accessible areas, with rates of postsecondary education generally declining with higher levels of remoteness. In 2021, 54.7% of Indigenous people living in easily accessible areas completed a postsecondary qualification, compared to 42.9% among those living in remote areas and to 27.0% in very remote areas. 
While this pattern was also observed for the non Indigenous population, non Indigenous adults were consistently more likely to have a postsecondary qualification across each level of remoteness. Notably, in 2021, over half (54.0%) of non Indigenous adults had a postsecondary credential in very remote areas, meaning that they were twice as likely as their Indigenous counterparts in very remote areas (27.0%) to have a postsecondary qualification.
Among Indigenous people, the difference by remoteness was particularly pronounced among Inuit. In 2021, Inuit living in easily accessible areas were more than twice as likely to have a postsecondary qualification than their counterparts in very remote areas (49.4% versus 21.7%) (see Chart 1). 
Much of the variation in overall postsecondary attainment among Inuit can be attributed to the large share of Inuit living in Inuit Nunangat, where all areas are classified as remote or very remote. In 2021, over two thirds (69.0%) of Inuit lived in Inuit Nunangat. With limited opportunities to participate in higher levels of education in their own communities, the share of Inuit living in Inuit Nunangat with a postsecondary qualification (23.7%) was much lower than the proportion (52.8%) of Inuit with a postsecondary qualification living outside Inuit Nunangat.
First Nations people also saw notable differences in educational attainment by level of remoteness. Among First Nations people with Registered or Treaty Indian status, 47.6% of those living off reserve held a postsecondary qualification in 2021, compared with 34.0% of those living on reserve. The overall lower rate of postsecondary attainment among First Nations people with Registered or Treaty Indian status living on reserve partially reflects the geographic distribution of those living on reserve, as approximately three in five (60.4%) First Nations people living on reserve were located in a remote or very remote area, where there may be limited or no access to postsecondary opportunities. 
In looking at changes in educational attainment from 2016 to 2021, there is considerable variation by type of postsecondary qualification. For instance, while the share of Indigenous people with a bachelor's degree or higher (+1.9 percentage points) has increased over that period, albeit to a smaller degree than the non Indigenous population (+4.5 percentage points), this increase was not seen for other education credentials. 
From 2016 to 2021, decreases were recorded in the share of Indigenous people with a postsecondary certificate or diploma below the bachelor level ( 2.2 percentage points), including the proportion with a college, CEGEP or other non university certificate or diploma ( 0.4 percentage points). Similar decreases were seen among the non Indigenous population ( 2.0 percentage points among those with a postsecondary certificate or diploma below the bachelor level; and  1.0 percentage points among those with a college, CEGEP or other non university certificate or diploma).
During the 2021 Census reference week, from May 2 to May 8, 2021, 61.2% of Indigenous adults aged 25 to 64 years were employed, with the proportions varying across Indigenous groups: 56.6% among First Nations people, 68.8% for Métis, and 55.2% for Inuit. While these employment rates all fell below the rate recorded for the non Indigenous population (74.1%), the gap narrowed with increasing levels of education.
The greatest gap was seen among adults without a postsecondary certificate, diploma or degree, where 38.1% of Indigenous adults aged 25 to 64 were employed, compared to 52.6% of non Indigenous adults in the same age range. This employment gap disappears among those with a bachelor's degree or higher, where 82.6% of Indigenous adults were employed, compared to the nearly identical rate of 82.5% for non Indigenous adults.
In addition, for Indigenous people with a bachelor's degree or higher, the difference in the employment rates across areas of remoteness was less pronounced, despite employment rates being lower among Indigenous people in more remote areas. 
First Nations people (54.8%), Métis (56.7%) and Inuit (56.5%) with a bachelor's degree or higher were all more likely to work in professional occupations (that is, occupations typically requiring a bachelor's degree or higher) than non Indigenous people (49.1%). 
Furthermore, Indigenous adults aged 25 to 64 were less likely to experience overqualification than non Indigenous adults in the same age range, that is, to have a higher level of education than what is typically required for the position they hold. In 2021, 9.4% of Indigenous adults aged 25 to 64 with a bachelor's degree or higher were overqualified, compared with 14.1% of the non Indigenous population in the same age range. 
Rates of overqualification of First Nations people (9.5%), Métis (9.4%) and Inuit (7.9%) aged 25 to 64 were all below that of the non Indigenous population. Nevertheless, the higher rate of overqualification among the non Indigenous population is explained by the inclusion of racialized and immigrant populations with foreign credentials, populations that have higher rates of overqualification than the non racialized or Canadian born population. For example, when the rate of overqualification among the Indigenous population is compared with that of the Canadian born, non Indigenous population, the rates of overqualification are identical at 9.4%.
The article entitled "Postsecondary educational attainment and labour market outcomes among Indigenous peoples in Canada, findings from the 2021 Census" is now available in Insights on Canadian Society (Catalogue number75 006 X). 
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
