Date:
2023-08-28
Article Title:
The Daily — Self-reported experiences of discrimination among Chinese people in Canada, and their perceptions of and experiences with the police and the justice system
Article Content:
Released: 2023 08 28
In the five years preceding the 2019 General Social Survey (GSS) on Canadians' Safety (Victimization), 3 in 10 (29%) Chinese people aged 15 and older in Canada reported experiencing discrimination or unfair treatment in their daily lives. While this proportion was similar to that of other racialized populations (29%), it was nearly double that of the non racialized population (16%).
The Juristat article, "Experiences of discrimination in daily life among Chinese people in Canada, and their perceptions of and experiences with the police and the justice system," released today, examines these topics among the Chinese population living in Canada and how findings differ, compared with other racialized populations and the non racialized population.
Compared with the 2014 GSS on Victimization, the proportion of Chinese people who experienced discrimination in 2019 nearly doubled (16% versus 29%). Increases were also noted among other racialized populations (21% in 2014 versus 29% in 2019) and the non racialized population (12% versus 16%); however, the rise was more pronounced among Chinese people.
The increase in discrimination experienced by Chinese people from 2014 to 2019 was largely driven by increases in discrimination based on race or skin colour and ethnicity or culture. Discrimination on the basis of language also increased, although to a lesser extent.
A large majority (85%) of Chinese people reported a great deal of or some confidence in the police; however, this was lower than among the non racialized population (92%). Chinese people said less often that they thought the police do a good job for every measure of police performance included in the survey, compared with other racialized populations and the non racialized population.
One quarter (25%) of Chinese people came into contact with police in the 12 months that preceded the GSS on Victimization, for a variety of reasons. The proportion of Chinese people who had contact with police was not significantly different, compared with other racialized populations (30%), but it was lower than the non racialized population (36%). Of those who had contact with police, three quarters (75%E) of Chinese people perceived their experience as positive, lower than other racialized populations (87%) and the non racialized population (89%).
According to the Canadian Legal Problems Survey, around one in six (16%) Chinese people experienced a serious legal problem or dispute such as discrimination, neighbourhood issues, harassment and debt or housing issues in the three years preceding the survey. Serious problems or disputes were less common for Chinese people than for those from other racialized populations (21%), while there was no difference compared with those from the non racialized population.
Chinese people who experienced a serious problem most commonly reported dealing with health or social impacts as a result (68%E), while nearly half (45%E) of Chinese people said that the serious legal problem they experienced had financial impacts.
The article "Experiences of discrimination in daily life among Chinese people in Canada, and their perceptions of and experiences with the police and the justice system" is now available as part of the publication Juristat (Catalogue number85 002 X).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
