Date:
2023-03-22
Article Title:
The Daily — Canadian Survey on the Provision of Child Care Services, 2022
Article Content:
Released: 2023 03 22
In 2022, 45,366 businesses across Canada provided child care services to children aged 0 to 12 years. Of these businesses, 31% were child care centres, 33% were home based settings operating with a license, and 36% were home based settings operating without a license.
Centres served a larger number of children, reporting that they had 821,298 children (either full time or part time) enrolled, while licensed and unlicensed home care providers reported fewer children, with 96,677 and 73,821 children enrolled respectively.
The results are from the Canadian Survey on the Provision of Child Care Services (CSPCCS), which collected information about the provision of child care services in Canada for children aged 12 and younger in the spring of 2022. The survey took place against the backdrop of a $27.2 billion investment in early learning and child care by the Canadian government. 
Businesses sampled for this survey were drawn both from Statistics Canada's Business Register and from publicly available lists of licensed/regulated child care providers and may underestimate some settings, such as child cares operated by schools or school boards.
For the purpose of this survey, child care businesses were described in three broad categories: child care centres, licensed home based child care, and unlicensed home based child care. Child care centres are generally larger in terms of both the number of children served and the number of employees and are typically located in a non residential building. Licensed home based providers adhere to established regulations determined by provincial or territorial standards, are smaller than centres in terms of the number of children attending and generally have no additional employees. Unlicensed home based child care providers are also small in terms of the number of children attending and generally have no employees but choose to provide a service outside of the regulated system, with the only requirement being a maximum number of children at one time.
Child care providers offer various child care options to parents, including care that is full time (six or more hours per day, five days per week) or part time (either part of the week for six or more hours per day or up to five days per week with less than six hours per day), before school, after school, evenings, weekends, overnight, drop in and flexible programs. 
Full time child care was the most common service offered in all types of child care businesses. In 2022, 81% of child care centres, 94% of licensed home based child care providers and 76% of unlicensed home based providers offered full time child care. 
Conversely, part time programs were less common, with 63% of child care centres, 33% of licensed home based providers and 50% of unlicensed home based providers offering this type of care. Unlicensed home based providers were more likely to offer child care during non standard hours (that is, evenings, weekends, and overnight) and were more likely to offer flexible child care (16%) in comparison to centres (11%) and licensed homes (8%). 
Previous parent reported surveys have shown that many parents using child care services experienced difficulty finding them. According to the CSPCCS, in 2022, 78% of child care centres had active waitlists. Since the survey did not collect information from parents, it is not possible to determine the reason that children were on the waitlist (e.g., preferred location, time, services, or if they did not have any child care at all when surveyed).
The CSPCCS also assessed availability of child care spaces. About 4 in 10 child care centres reported having at least one available full time spot, followed by one quarter of licensed home based settings and 19% of unlicensed home based settings. The CSPCCS did not collect information on the age categories (i.e., infant, toddler, preschool, school aged) in which spaces were available. 
In spring 2022, about one in three (34%) child care centres were looking to fill a vacant position for an employee with Early Childhood Education credentials or training. Furthermore, almost 90% of child care centres reported having difficulties filling vacant positions. The most common reasons included applicants' lack of qualifications, having few or no applicants to choose from, and applicants' lack of related work experience. 
The article "Characteristics of child care centres serving children aged 0 to 5 years in Canada, 2021 to 2022," is now available in the March 2023 online issue of Economic and Social Reports, Vol. 3, no. 3 (36 28 0001).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
