Date:
2023-05-16
Article Title:
The Daily — Climate change statistics
Article Content:
Released: 2023 05 16
Statistics Canada's new Climate change statistics page is now available.
Natural disasters and extreme weather events are increasing in severity and frequency and are affecting Canadians and businesses on many fronts. Effects include health impacts due to lower air quality, population displacements from wildfires, flood induced business closures and higher energy bills from using fans and air conditioners to stave off the extreme heat.
The impacts of climate change are being felt across Canada's society, economy and environment. The need for high quality climate change data has never been more urgent, as governments, businesses and communities work to put measures in place to help protect Canadians from further climate events and to support them in recovering from natural disasters.
Statistics Canada produces many datasets that can support these efforts. To help users find these data more easily, the agency has centralized all climate change related data in one user friendly online location. On this new webpage, users will find data on the causes and impacts of climate change, as well as the measures put in place to help Canadians mitigate and adapt to its effects.
Examples of climate change related data available on the website include spending on infrastructure to help protect against floods, which are increasing in frequency and severity. In recent years, governments and businesses have been investing increasingly significant resources into flood protection measures.
From 2018 to 2021, spending on flood protection infrastructure rose nearly 90% to $1.7 billion. Over this period, Ontario had the highest expenditures, totalling $2.5 billion, which is double the amount invested in any other province.
In contrast, Prince Edward Island had the lowest spending on flood protection infrastructure over the same period, totalling $11.5 million. However, investments in flood protection infrastructure within the province have been steadily growing, reaching $5.4 million in 2021, up markedly from $0.6 million in 2018.
Check out the new infographic "Climate change statistics at Statistics Canada" to find more examples of climate change related data from Statistics Canada.
The infographic "Climate change statistics at Statistics Canada," part of Statistics Canada   Infographics (Catalogue number11 627 M), is now available. 
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
