Date:
2023-05-17
Article Title:
The Daily — Sleep and obesity in the Canadian Armed Forces
Article Content:
Released: 2023 05 17
Sleep disturbance and sleep duration have been associated with obesity in the general population, but few studies have examined this in a military setting. The Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) differ from the general population in their occupational demands, such as deployments and frequent and regular postings; requirements for physical training, testing and maintenance of physical levels; and a unique workforce culture. Because the CAF population is generally excluded from national population health surveys, the study "Sleep duration, sleep quality and obesity in the Canadian Armed Forces" provides data on a unique and understudied military population.
Based on data from the 2019 Canadian Armed Forces Health Survey, less than half (42%) of Regular Force members reported getting the recommended hours of sleep (7 hours to fewer than 10 hours). Females were significantly more likely than males to report usual sleep duration in the recommended range (49% for females; 40% for males), trouble falling or staying asleep (32% for females; 24% for males) and that sleep was not refreshing (64% for females; 58% for males). Difficulty staying awake was less frequently reported and did not differ significantly between females (6%) and males (5%). Male Regular Force members were more likely than female members to be classified as overweight (45% for males; 33% for females) or obese (29% for males; 22% for females).
Short sleep duration (fewer than 6 hours) and borderline short sleep duration (6 hours to fewer than 7 hours) were independently associated with increased odds of obesity for male CAF members, but not for females. These results take into account differences in a range of other factors, including sociodemographic, work and health characteristics of CAF members.
Shorter than recommended sleep duration, poor sleep quality and obesity are concerns for long term health, wellbeing and deployment readiness of the military population. Sleep has been identified as an important aspect of physical performance in both the CAF and the US military. Because sleep affects energy balance, eating and physical activity behaviours, it has been identified as a potential tool to aid in managing obesity. Longitudinal or intervention studies are needed to better understand the potential role of healthy sleep practices in obesity management, particularly in military populations.
The article "Sleep duration, sleep quality and obesity in the Canadian Armed Forces" is now available in the May 2023 online issue of Health Reports, Vol. 34, No. 5 (Catalogue number82 003 X).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
