Date:
2023-01-13
Article Title:
The Daily — Survey of Employees under Federal Jurisdiction, 2022
Article Content:
Released: 2023 01 13
The conditions under which Canadians work, including work hours, health and safety, wages and benefits, represent an important component of quality of life and well being. The results of the Survey of Employees under Federal Jurisdiction (SEFJ) offer insights into all these aspects for employees working in federally regulated workplaces, including information on differences by gender.
In Canada, provincial and territorial governments have jurisdiction over most workplaces in terms of establishing employment standards and protecting labour rights. However, some industries, particularly those involving activities that cross provincial and international borders, are federally regulated under the Canada Labour Code. 
The 2022 SEFJ provides detailed information on the working conditions experienced by employees who worked in the eight major industries under federal jurisdiction in 2020, which may help inform future changes to the Canada Labour Code. The data exclude smaller federal jurisdiction industries, such as federal government museums and uranium mining. The federal public administration, for which only some parts of the Canada Labour Code apply, is also excluded.
Federally regulated industries covered by the 2022 SEFJ were banks, road transportation, air transportation, telecommunications and broadcasting, postal services and pipelines, maritime transportation, feed, flour, seed and grain and rail transportation.
Most employees under federal jurisdiction were men (64.7%), ranging from more than 8 in 10 (85.8%) in rail transportation to 6 in 10 (59.7%) in telecommunications and broadcasting. At the same time, women represented the majority of employees (53.8%) in banks in 2020.
Consistent with the higher proportion of men who are generally more likely than women to work full time the share of employees working part time (less than 30 hours per week) was lower among employees under federal jurisdiction. According to results from the Labour Force Survey (LFS), the overall rate of part time work for all employees was 15.0% in 2020. In comparison, around 1 in 10 employees (10.5%) under federal jurisdiction were working part time, with the highest proportions observed in postal services and pipelines (29.3%) and air transportation (20.1%).
While female employees working for businesses under federal jurisdiction were slightly more likely to work part time (12.4%) than men (9.5%), their rate of part time work was lower than among all female employees in 2020 (20.6%, LFS data). Within the federal jurisdiction, the share of women working part time ranged from 31.6% in postal services and pipelines and 29.2% in air transportation to 6.4% in banks.
Whether due to the actions of colleagues, supervisors or the public, the presence of harassment in the workplace which includes sexual and non sexual forms, as well as violence can have lasting impacts on employee morale and can foster a hostile work environment. Harassment may involve a series of incidents over time or a single, yet severe, experience. Within the federal jurisdiction, 5.6% of employees indicated that they had experienced some form of harassment at their workplace within the previous two years (for more information, see the Note to readers). Rates of harassment were among the highest in rail transportation (11.2%) and air transportation (8.0%).
Female employees working under federal jurisdiction experienced relatively similar rates of harassment (6.5%) compared with men (5.1%). Based on the most recent data for all workers from the General Social Survey, 19% of women and 13% of men experienced harassment at their workplace in 2016, suggesting that federal jurisdiction employees may be at lower risk of exposure to harassment.
Within the federal jurisdiction, the share of women who faced harassment in road transportation (12.0%) was notably higher than men (3.5%). At the same time, women were less likely to experience harassment in banks overall (3.1%). Female employees in business, finance and administration occupations which accounted for 67.0% of all women working in banks were less than half as likely to have experienced harassment in the previous two years (5.0%) than female employees working in trades, transport and equipment operators and related occupations (12.7%). 
Different types of leave can help support workers through challenging life events such as long term illnesses or the birth of a child. Among employees under federal jurisdiction, 83.0% of women with a full time permanent job indicated that they had access to maternity leave that was at least partly paid by their employer that is, through payments or top ups additional to any maternity benefits received through the Employment Insurance program. This was higher than the overall share for all female employees with a permanent full time job in 2021 (61.7%), when annual LFS estimates first became available on this topic. Within the federal jurisdiction, the proportion of women who had access to paid maternity leave was notably lower for temporary employees (60.7%).
Although most employees under federal jurisdiction reported relatively safe working conditions on the job, 7.1% of employees noted that they had been exposed to unsafe conditions in the workplace within the previous two years. Unsafe working conditions refer to situations in which employees are exposed to danger or hazards beyond any normal or regular amount typically involved on the job. The industries under federal jurisdiction which had higher rates of exposure to unsafe working conditions included rail transportation (18.7%), postal services and pipelines (12.2%), and maritime transportation (11.7%).
Across all industries under federal jurisdiction, men (8.4%) were more likely to be exposed to unsafe working conditions than women (4.5%). This pattern is partly explained by women's greater concentration in office based work environments, such as banks, where fewer employees experience unsafe conditions.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
