Date:
2023-04-19
Article Title:
The Daily — Educational and economic outcomes of lesbian, gay and bisexual people in Canada: A closer look at Canadian-born, immigrant and racialized populations
Article Content:
Released: 2023 04 19
Using data from combined cycles of the Canadian Community Health Survey (2015 to 2018), a new article released today provides an overview of ethnocultural and linguistic diversity among the lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) population in Canada. The release also takes a closer look at the educational and economic outcomes of Canadian born, immigrant and racialized LGB individuals to better understand inequities experienced by different segments of the population. Data on respondents reporting an Indigenous identity are not included in this study.
Among the overall Canadian born population aged 25 to 64 years, gay or lesbian people (38.0%) were more likely to hold a bachelor's degree or higher when compared with their heterosexual counterparts (28.3%). Conversely, a larger share of immigrants held a university degree than their Canadian born counterparts, regardless of sexual orientation. More than half of gay or lesbian immigrants (55.0%) and nearly half of bisexual (49.6%) and heterosexual (45.8%) immigrants aged 25 to 64 years had at least a bachelor's degree, a higher percentage than that of Canadian born people of the same sexual orientations.
Among the Canadian born population aged 25 to 64 years who worked full time in the week before the survey, heterosexual people had the highest median annual employment income ($58,000). Gay or lesbian individuals earned lower median incomes ($50,100) than their heterosexual counterparts, while bisexual people had the lowest earnings ($38,800) among the Canadian born population of the same age group.
When the results were disaggregated by racialized and non racialized populations (see Note to readers), the earnings disparity seen among bisexual people aged 25 to 64 years persisted. That is, Canadian born bisexual people both racialized and non racialized had less favourable economic outcomes than their heterosexual and gay or lesbian counterparts.
While Canadian born LGB individuals had lower median employment incomes relative to heterosexual people, results showed a somewhat different pattern among the immigrant population. The comparative advantage of Canadian born heterosexual people was not seen for heterosexual immigrants, who had similar earnings to LGB immigrants. There were no statistically significant differences in median earnings across immigrants of different sexual orientations among full time workers aged 25 to 64 years.
Disparities in employment income were only evident when comparing racialized and non racialized immigrants. Non racialized heterosexual and gay or lesbian immigrants had more favourable economic outcomes than racialized immigrants of all sexual orientations. This was because of the generally lower annual median income of racialized heterosexual ($45,000) and gay or lesbian ($42,400) immigrants, which was similar to that of racialized bisexual immigrants ($40,700).
The analysis explored other factors that may have an effect on economic outcomes. The LGB population, the bisexual population in particular, was younger on average than the heterosexual population. However, the earnings gaps among the groups studied remained after taking age and educational attainment into account.
The article "Ethnocultural diversity among lesbian, gay and bisexual people in Canada: An overview of educational and economic outcomes" which is part of Just the Facts (89 28 0001), is now available.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
