Date:
2023-06-12
Article Title:
The Daily — Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey, 2021
Article Content:
Released: 2023 06 12
Routine childhood vaccination is recommended to help prevent and control a variety of diseases in children, including diphtheria, pertussis, measles, tetanus and polio. Vaccines administered to children not only help protect those who are vaccinated, but also those who are unable to be vaccinated. In Canada, routine vaccines recommended by the National Advisory Committee on Immunization are provided to children free of charge as part of provincial and territorial publicly funded programs.
The results published today are from the Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey (CNICS) collected in 2021, during the COVID 19 pandemic. At the time, Canadians faced many changes to their daily lives. While essential immunizations for children under 2 years of age remained prioritized, in school vaccination programs for adolescents experienced delays and interruptions that differed across jurisdictions. A comparison with the previous CNICS cycle in 2019, conducted just prior to the pandemic, will help to start quantifying some of the early impacts this historical event may have had on vaccinations and on the knowledge and beliefs of parents and guardians who make decisions about child vaccination. Due to an alternating approach in sampling methodology across cycles, the CNICS 2019 results are the latest available comparator for national level estimates, while the CNICS 2017 results are the latest available comparators for provincial  and territorial level estimates.
Although CNICS 2021 results show the early impacts of the pandemic seem to have had little influence on national immunization rates in 2021, it is important to note that many children in the target population would have received some or all of their recommended vaccines prior to the onset of the pandemic. Generally, national immunization rates in Canada remained stable across all childhood age groups in 2021 compared with 2019. However, an increased immunization rate against human papillomavirus (HPV) among boys aged 14 years was identified (81% in 2021 compared with 73% in 2019). Most parents and guardians reported either that the pandemic had no influence (80%) or that they were more inclined (18%) to get their child vaccinated. Additional insights from the CNICS are available from the Public Health Agency of Canada.
In 2021, 92% of children aged 2 years had been vaccinated against measles. Similarly, 92% received the recommended number of doses of the polio vaccine. These percentages are relatively unchanged from 2019 (90% for measles and 92% for polio). In addition, more than three quarters (77%) of children aged 2 years received the recommended number of doses for the diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis vaccine (DTaP) which is similar to the 78% observed in 2019. For the varicella vaccine, 87% of children aged 2 years had been immunized in 2021, up from 83% in 2019. In Canada, there are national coverage goals to be met by 2025 for publicly funded vaccines in the provinces and territories.
For children aged 7 years, 72% had received the recommended number of vaccine doses for the diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis vaccine, and 79% had received the Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib) vaccine, percentages that are equivalent to those reported in 2019. For children aged 14 years, the vaccination rate against HPV increased from 73% in 2019 to 81% in 2021 for boys, and the rate for girls of the same age remained similar to 2019, at 86%. For those aged 17 years, the vaccine rates for the tetanus–diphtheria–pertussis booster vaccine (93%) and the meningococcal vaccine (89%) were similar to the 2019 rates.
In Canada, the recommended schedule for childhood vaccines varies by province and territory. In 2021, the national target of 95% of vaccination coverage for children aged 2 years remains unmet in most provinces and territories. However, some provinces such as British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec and Prince Edward Island showed an increase in vaccination coverage for two or more recommended vaccines compared with previous CNICS results at the provincial and territorial level last collected in 2017.
Comparisons between the 2017 and 2021 results show that in some jurisdictions, such as Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Saskatchewan, Alberta, Yukon, and Northwest Territories, vaccination coverage has remained relatively stable, while Newfoundland and Labrador and Nunavut experienced decreases. For a complete historical series, please consult the Vaccine coverage estimates for recommended vaccines in children and pregnant women.
In 2021, new data were collected to better understand possible differences in immunization rates across racialized groups in Canada. Vaccination rates varied significantly between the non Indigenous, non racialized people (referred to hereafter as non racialized people) and other population groups. Overall, Chinese and Filipino people had a higher immunization rate than non racialized people, while Black people had lower rates for most of the recommended vaccines. In particular, 73% of Black people had received the recommended four doses of pneumococcal, by age 2, compared with 86% of non racialized people. Recommended vaccines for diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus ranged from 66% among Black people to 87% among Chinese people.
No significant difference in vaccination rates between Indigenous and non Indigenous children aged 2 years were identified, with the exception of the polio vaccine, where 95% of Indigenous children received it compared with 92% of non Indigenous children. Due to small sample sizes, separate estimates for First Nations people living off reserve, Métis and Inuit could not be published.
In 2021, most Canadian parents and guardians of children aged 2 years continued to believe that childhood vaccines are safe (97%) and effective (98%). Furthermore, parents and guardians continued to have a high degree of trust in medical doctors as a source of information on immunization, with 92% of respondents having said they "trust" or "really trust" medical doctors. Parents and guardians also said they "trust" or "really trust" family (42%) and friends (31%) as sources of immunization information.
Although most (80%) Canadian parents and guardians reported that the pandemic had no influence on their decision to get their children vaccinated in 2021, those influenced by the pandemic stated being more inclined (18%) to get their child vaccinated. Being more inclined to get vaccinated as a result of the pandemic varied based on the age of the child, with a greater likelihood for those with school aged children. Among parents and guardians of children aged 2 years, 8% reported that they were more inclined to get their children vaccinated because of the pandemic. This percentage was even greater in parents and guardians of children aged 7 years (18%), 14 years (24%) and 17 years (21%).
While most parents and guardians of children aged 2 years reported that the pandemic had no influence on their decision to get their children vaccinated, variations were observed by geography, population group and Indigenous identity. People living in Nunavut were most likely to report that the pandemic made them more inclined to get their children vaccinated (18%), and those in Quebec were the least likely (4%). In addition, Filipino (22%) parents and guardians were the most likely to report being more inclined to get their children vaccinated, followed by Chinese (19%), South Asian (15%) and non racialized (4%) parents and guardians. Similarly, when comparing by Indigenous identity, Inuit parents and guardians (36%) were most likely to report being more inclined to get their children vaccinated, followed by non Indigenous parents and guardians (8%) and First Nations parents and guardians living off reserve (2%).
In 2021, 6% of parents and guardians reported that they encountered obstacles in getting their child vaccinated due to the pandemic. The two most commonly reported obstacles that parents and guardians of children aged 2 years reported were limited appointment availability (74%) and concern about being exposed to COVID 19 (36%). Parents and guardians were also asked whether any of their child's vaccines had been delayed by 30 days or more because of the pandemic, to which 7% responded they had. These responses differed slightly by age group: parents and guardians of children aged 2 years reported limited appointment availability (52%) and concern about being exposed to COVID 19 (25%) as the main reasons for delay, whereas parents and guardians of children aged 14 years reported vaccination no longer being available at school (58%) and limited appointment availability (22%) as the main reasons for delay.
Future efforts to better understand the full impacts of the pandemic on vaccine coverage will be especially important, as interruptions to immunization programs can lead to an increase in vaccine preventable infections and deaths as well as reduce the population's overall immunity.
For more information about the survey, contact the Public Health Agency of Canada's General Enquiries (1 844 280 5020).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
