Date:
2023-02-14
Article Title:
The Daily — Younger Canadians experience lower perceived well-being: Insights from the Canadian Social Survey
Article Content:
Released: 2023 02 14
Over the past two years, older adults in Canada (aged 65 to 84 years) reported the highest perceived well being, when considering a handful of available quality of life indicators in a combined analysis. Specifically, 41% of those aged 65 to 84 years had a high combined score, compared with 25% of those aged 20 to 29 years. Men and women reported similar combined perceived well being scores at all ages. 
A new analysis of nine quality of life indicators based on five waves of the Canadian Social Survey (CSS) (2021 and 2022) used factor analysis, a statistical approach that simplifies the analysis of multiple variables. For ease of interpretation, the results are presented by describing the proportion of individuals with a high combined perceived well being score across these nine indicators. 
These nine indicators form part of Canada's Quality of Life Framework, which brings together data for approximately 85 key indicators on the well being of people in Canada. The Framework enables the federal government to identify future policy priorities and to build on previous actions to improve evidence based decision making and budgeting. As part of the overall framework, the CSS has collected data on several indicators, updated today. 
Small differences were found in perceived well being across regions of Canada. Quebec (37%) had the largest proportion of people with high perceived well being, followed closely by Atlantic Canada (36%), while 30% of those in British Columbia had high perceived well being. Many of these regional differences were due in part to the responses of young adults (aged 20 to 29 years). For example, 20% of young adults in British Columbia had high perceived well being, compared with 34% of young adults in Quebec. This difference was less pronounced for older age groups.
In rural regions, 39% of Canadians had high levels of perceived well being, compared with 32% of those living in urban areas. 
In this report, 12% of people identified as a person with a disability and reported having a long term condition. A smaller proportion (15%) of those people had high perceived well being, compared with those who did not have a long term condition (42%). 
Long term conditions were more prevalent among older age groups, at 61% among those aged 65 years and older, compared with 41% among those aged 15 to 29 years. However, the perceived well being of younger adults was more strongly affected by the presence of a long term condition. For example, 25% of Canadians aged less than 60 years with a long term condition had a high perceived well being, compared with 51% of those aged 60 years and older. Notably, this analysis does not account for the type of long term condition present.
Overall, 18% of LGBTQ2+ people had high perceived well being, compared with 34% of non LGBTQ2+ people. However, among the LGBTQ2+ population, youth and young adults (aged 15 to 29 years) (10%) were less likely to have a high perceived well being than those aged 60 years and older (32%). About 39% of people aged 60 years and older who were not LGBTQ2+ had high perceived well being. 
In partnership with the Treasury Board Secretariat of Canada, the Department of Finance Canada and the Privy Council Office, Statistics Canada is leading work to develop and share data and insights on quality of life in Canada. New tables of quarterly data have been released today (see Note to readers). 
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
