Date:
2023-05-08
Article Title:
The Daily — Area-level measure of the population with less than high school education in Canada, 2016
Article Content:
Released: 2023 05 08
A growing body of research is showing an association between low levels of education and poor health outcomes, including increased risk of premature death. Investigating this relationship is limited due to a lack of sociodemographic information in administrative data in Canada, including death records. To fill this data gap, Statistics Canada is releasing a new area level measure of the population with less than high school education using the 2016 Census of Population data. This measure can be integrated with administrative records and survey data to understand inequalities associated with a low level of education in Canada.
This measure ranks Canadian census dissemination areas into five equal sized groups (quintiles) based on the age standardized proportion of the population aged 20 years and over in private households whose highest level of educational attainment was less than high school in 2016. The first quintile represents areas having the lowest proportion of the population with less than a high school education, whereas the fifth quintile represents areas having the highest proportion of the population with less than a high school education.
To demonstrate how the area level education quintiles can be used in health inequality analysis, potentially avoidable age standardized mortality rates (ASMR) were calculated by quintiles and sex for Canada using the Canadian Vital Statistics – Death Database (2017 to 2019). Differences in ASMR between quintiles could be explained by other factors not included in the analysis, such as geography, income, occupation, etc. Therefore, results should be interpreted with caution.
Potentially avoidable mortality refers to premature deaths taking place under the age of 75 that could have been avoided through prevention practices (e.g., lifestyle modifications, vaccinations, injury prevention, etc.), public health policies (e.g., regulations, actions and decisions implemented to promote public health) or timely and effective health care (Health Indicators, 2012).
Potentially avoidable mortality rates were unevenly distributed across the less than high school education quintiles in Canada. In areas with the highest proportion of population with less than a high school education (quintile 5), the avoidable mortality rate was more than double (2.1 times) the rate observed in areas with the lowest proportion of population with less than a high school education (quintile 1).
Although the potentially avoidable mortality rates among men were higher than among women for all quintiles, there was a clear gradient of increasing rates of avoidable mortality with higher proportions of both men and women with less than high school education. Among men, the ASMR was 379 deaths per 100,000 population in quintile 5 (lowest education quintile) compared with 178 deaths per 100,000 population in quintile 1 (highest education quintile). Among women, the ASMR was 225 deaths per 100,000 population in quintile 5 compared with 110 deaths per 100,000 population in quintile 1 (Chart 1).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
