Date:
2024-11-29
Article Title:
The Daily — Gross domestic product, income and expenditure, third quarter 2024
Article Content:
Released: 2024 11 29
Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased 0.3% in the third quarter, after rising 0.5% in both the second and first quarters. The contributions to GDP growth from higher household and government spending were moderated by slower non farm inventory accumulation, lower business capital investment and lower exports.
On a per capita basis, GDP fell 0.4% in the third quarter, which was the sixth consecutive quarterly decline.
Household spending rose 0.9% in the third quarter, led by increased spending on new trucks, vans and sport utility vehicles. Higher spending on financial services also contributed to the increase in household expenditures, while spending on accommodation and food services fell.
Per capita household expenditures edged up 0.2% in the third quarter, after falling in six of the last eight quarters.
Government expenditures increased 1.1% in the third quarter, the third consecutive quarterly increase since the decline in the fourth quarter of 2023. Spending across all levels of government increased in the third quarter of 2024.
Businesses continued to add to their non farm inventories in the third quarter (+$18.5 billion) but at a slower pace compared with the second quarter (+$27.8 billion). The slower overall inventory accumulation was due to reduced accumulations in retail motor vehicles and drawdowns in inventory of manufacturing durable and non durable goods.
Business spending on machinery and equipment decreased 7.8% in the third quarter, led by lower spending on aircraft and other transportation equipment and parts. This coincided with decreased imports of aircraft and ships, following a significant rise in the previous quarter.
Business investment in non residential structures was virtually unchanged in the third quarter, as the decline in business non residential building construction offset the increase in engineering structures.
Business spending on intellectual property products increased 1.4% in the third quarter, mainly due to increased spending on research and development (+4.2%) and mineral exploration and evaluation (+3.0%).
Housing investment increased 0.8% in the third quarter, the first expansion since the third quarter of 2023. The growth in the third quarter of 2024 was due to higher ownership transfer costs (+4.9%), which represent resale activity. Conversely, spending on renovations ( 0.4%) and new construction ( 0.1%) declined. Increased work put in place for new units, primarily singles and apartments, was offset by a marked decrease in absorptions of apartments in Ontario.
Exports of goods and services fell 0.3% in the third quarter, after declining 1.4% in the second quarter. The leading contributors to the decrease in the third quarter were lower exports of unwrought gold, passenger cars and light trucks, and travel services. An increase in exports of crude oil and bitumen moderated the overall decrease.
Imports of goods and services edged down 0.1% in the third quarter, after a 0.2% decline in the second quarter. Lower imports of passenger cars and light trucks led the decrease in the third quarter, followed by other transportation equipment and parts and metal ores and concentrates.
The GDP deflator increased 0.6% in the third quarter, as prices were up for both government and household final consumption expenditures. Import prices also rose, while export prices declined, lowering the terms of trade the ratio of the price of exports to the price of imports for the fourth consecutive quarter.
Compensation of employees rose 1.7% in the third quarter, driven by wage growth in finance, real estate and company management (+3.1%) and educational services (+3.3%). Growth in educational services reflected the collective bargaining agreements signed in Quebec and Ontario and the resulting wage rate increases and retroactive payments.
Prince Edward Island (+2.7%) had the largest increase in compensation of employees, followed by Quebec (+2.5%) and New Brunswick (+2.4%). Yukon's compensation of employees declined 2.1% in the third quarter, coinciding with a closure of a large gold mine.
Household net saving increased in the third quarter, as disposable income (+2.3%) grew at double the rate of spending (+1.2%) (in nominal terms). Disposable income gains were mainly due to wages and salaries, while the drag of rising interest costs lessened, as interest payments on mortgages and consumer credit ( 0.6%) declined for the first time since the third quarter of 2021. The Bank of Canada cut the policy interest rate by 75 basis points from June to September 2024, and it announced further cuts in October. Consequently, the household saving rate reached a three year peak of 7.1% in the third quarter, up from 6.2% in the second quarter. By comparison, the saving rate at the end of 2019 was below 3.0%. The household saving rate is aggregated across all income brackets; in general, saving rates are greater in higher income brackets.
Corporate income fell 1.1% in the third quarter, after increasing 2.1% in the previous quarter. This decrease was attributable to a weaker gross operating surplus among non financial corporations ( 1.4%). The decline for non financial corporations was broad based, led by the motor vehicle industries within the manufacturing, wholesale and retail sectors. Oil and gas extraction and petroleum manufacturing softened the overall decrease with positive growth related to increased output. Services were also generally positive, with continued growth being observed in transportation and warehousing activity.
Gross operating surplus for financial corporations (+0.9%) continued to grow in the third quarter despite destructive weather events that negatively impacted the surplus of property and auto insurance companies. The third quarter was the second costliest in terms of insured damages in Canada's history, given several concurrent and significant weather related events: the Calgary hailstorm, the impact of Hurricane Debby in Quebec, flooding in southern Ontario and the Jasper wildfires. Offsetting the lower surplus for property and auto insurance companies was higher income in the banking sector, where falling interest rates enabled higher spreads between loans and deposits.
The data visualization product "Gross domestic product by income and expenditure: Interactive tool," which is part of the Statistics Canada – Data Visualization Products series (Catalogue number71 607 X), is now available.
The document "The 2021 to 2023 Revisions of the Income and Expenditure Accounts," which is part of Latest Developments in the Canadian Economic Accounts (Catalogue number13 605 X), is now available.
The document "Revisions to Canada's GDP," which is part of Latest Developments in the Canadian Economic Accounts (Catalogue number13 605 X), is available.
The Economic accounts statistics portal, accessible from the Subjects module of the Statistics Canada website, features an up to date portrait of national and provincial economies and their structure.
The User Guide: Canadian System of Macroeconomic Accounts (Catalogue number13 606 G) is available. 
The Methodological Guide: Canadian System of Macroeconomic Accounts (Catalogue number13 607 X) is available.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
