Date:
2024-10-02
Article Title:
The Daily — A snapshot of alcohol consumption levels in Canada: Half of Canadian adults reported not drinking any alcohol in the past seven days, 2023
Article Content:
Released: 2024 10 02
In 2023, more than three quarters (77%) of adults living in Canada's provinces reported drinking at least one alcoholic beverage in the past 12 months. To better understand regular drinking behaviour, the 2023 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) asked about alcohol use in the past seven days. Results show that in the seven days preceding the survey, 54% of people aged 18 and older, living in the provinces, reported not drinking any alcohol, 15% reported drinking one to two standard alcoholic drinks, 15% reported drinking three to six drinks and 15% reported drinking seven or more drinks (Table 1).
In 2023, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released Canada's Guidance on Alcohol and Health, which provides new evidence based recommendations on alcohol consumption, to help Canadians make informed decisions about their health. The recommendations promote reducing alcohol consumption to reduce the risk of alcohol related harms, and define four different risk zones based on the number of standard alcoholic drinks consumed per week. These zones represent a continuum of risk: no alcohol consumption (no risk of alcohol related harms), one to two standard alcoholic drinks per week (low risk), three to six standard drinks per week (moderate risk), and seven or more standard drinks per week (increasingly high risk). This release explores the results of the CCHS in the context of this new guidance.
Previous data have shown that males drink more alcohol compared with females. Alcohol affects males and females in different ways, as females generally absorb alcohol faster than males, which can lead to higher blood alcohol levels for the same amount of alcohol consumed. In 2023, nearly twice as many men (20%) as women (11%) reported drinking seven or more drinks in the past seven days (Table 1), which is the level of alcohol consumption linked to the highest risk of alcohol related harms. A similar proportion of men (15%) and women (16%) reported drinking one to two drinks in the past seven days, while 16% of men and 15% of women reported drinking three to six drinks in the past seven days. In terms of abstinence, a higher proportion of women (59%) reported not drinking any alcohol in the past seven days compared with men (49%).
Differences were observed in the alcohol consumption levels of the youngest adults, compared with the rest of the population. In 2023, a higher proportion of younger Canadians aged 18 to 22 reported not drinking any alcoholic beverages in the past seven days (67%) compared with those in all other age groups (for which the proportions varied from 51% to 57%) (Table 1). Furthermore, a lower proportion of those aged 18 to 22 reported drinking seven or more alcoholic drinks in the past seven days (8%) compared with those in the other age groups, where proportions ranged from 14% to 17%.
At the provincial level (Table 1), a higher proportion of those living in Quebec reported drinking seven or more standard alcoholic drinks in the past seven days (18%) compared with the national average (15%) in 2023. On the other hand, a lower proportion of those living in New Brunswick (12%), Ontario (14%), Saskatchewan (13%) and Alberta (14%) reported drinking seven or more drinks in the past seven days. In addition, a lower proportion of those living in Quebec reported not drinking any alcoholic drinks in the past seven days (47%) compared with the national average (54%), whereas a higher proportion of those living in Newfoundland and Labrador (58%), New Brunswick (60%), Ontario (58%), Manitoba (57%), Saskatchewan (59%) and Alberta (57%) reported not drinking any alcohol in the past seven days.
In 2023, about one in five (19%) residents living in rural areas in Canada reported drinking seven or more drinks in the past seven days, which was higher than those living in urban areas (14%) (Table 1). In addition, more than half (56%) of those living in urban areas reported not drinking any alcohol in the past seven days, which was higher compared with those living in rural areas (49%).
When looking at results by total household income, the CCHS 2023 data show a link between higher income and increased drinking, which is consistent with previous findings. Most notably, comparing those in the highest and lowest household income quintiles, 22% of those living in households in the highest household income quintile reported drinking seven or more standard alcoholic drinks in the past seven days, which was twice as high as those in the lowest household income quintile (11%) (Table 2). Among those in the lowest household income quintile, 67% reported not drinking any alcohol in the past seven days, which was higher than those in the highest income quintile, where 41% reported not drinking any alcohol.
When looking at the drinking habits of employed people, data from CCHS 2023 showed differences in weekly alcohol consumption by type of occupation. In fact, for people who reported working in health occupations, 10% reported drinking seven or more drinks in the past seven days, which was lower than for people in all other occupation categories (Table 2). In addition, 23% of people working in trades, transport and equipment operation, and 22% of people working in arts, culture, recreation and sports, reported drinking seven or more drinks in the past seven days, both of which were higher than the Canadian average (15%).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
