Date:
2024-09-06
Article Title:
The Daily — Securities statistics, second quarter 2024
Article Content:
Released: 2024 09 06
Net borrowings by Canadian corporations and governments in the form of debt securities totalled $27.2 billion in the second quarter, down from net issuances of $89.0 billion in the previous quarter. The activity in the second quarter was led by the government sector and by non financial corporations, and it mainly reflected debt refinancing operations.
Overall, the total outstanding value of Canadian debt securities, in book value terms, reached $5,869.9 billion at the end of the second quarter, up $42.0 billion from the previous quarter.
Net issuances of debt securities by the government sector totalled $15.7 billion in the second quarter, down significantly from the previous two quarters. The financing activity targeted long term debt securities (+$32.4 billion) and was moderated by net retirements of short term debt securities ( $16.7 billion). Specifically, provincial and territorial governments issued a net $36.6 billion of bonds, the highest amount in four years. Meanwhile, they repaid $28.8 billion of money market instruments, the largest retirement on record.
Canadian non financial corporations were also net borrowers of funds in the second quarter, raising $14.2 billion on credit markets. Firms from the construction industry contributed the most to the net issuance activity, followed by those from the transportation and warehousing industry. 
In contrast, Canadian financial corporations repaid a net $2.7 billion of debt securities over the second quarter, led by chartered banks. Specifically, Canadian chartered banks repaid a net $29.9 billion worth of debt securities with fixed interest rates and issued instruments with variable rates totalling $19.9 billion.
In June, the Bank of Canada reduced its policy interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.75%, the first reduction since March 2020.
Net retirements of Canadian equity securities totalled $8.5 billion in the second quarter, a 10th consecutive quarter in which retirements exceeded new issuances. Retirements in the second quarter were driven by merger and acquisition activities and, to a lesser extent, share buyback activities. The market value of outstanding Canadian equity securities reached $4,240.6 billion at the end of the second quarter, down $16.0 billion from the previous quarter. Canadian equity prices, as measured by the Standard and Poor's / Toronto Stock Exchange composite index, decreased by 1.3% in the second quarter.
The data visualization product "Securities statistics," part of the series Statistics Canada – Data Visualization Products (Catalogue number71 607 X), is available online.
The document "Enhancing Canada's statistics on securities," part of Latest Developments in the Canadian Economic Accounts (Catalogue number13 605 X), is also available.
The Economic accounts statistics portal, accessible from the Subjects module of the Statistics Canada website, features an up to date portrait of national and provincial economies and their structure.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
