Date:
2024-03-28
Article Title:
The Daily — Non-profit institutions and volunteering: Economic contribution, first quarter to fourth quarter 2023
Article Content:
Released: 2024 03 28
Real gross domestic product (GDP) of non profit institutions edged up 0.1% in the fourth quarter, after rising 0.8% in the third quarter. Increases in real GDP of non profits serving households and businesses was largely offset by a decline in real GDP of non profits serving governments. In comparison, economy wide real GDP edged up 0.2% in the fourth quarter.
Real GDP of non profits serving households grew 1.1% in the fourth quarter, as reliance on non profit services by families and individuals increased, partly owing to a faster rise in cost of living compared with income gains of the lowest income households. This was apparent in the Distributions of household economic accounts for the third quarter, which showed a decline in the net savings of the lowest income households. Households in this category tend to rely more on non profit services, including food banks. 
In the fourth quarter, real GDP of non profit institutions serving businesses rose 0.9%, the fourth consecutive quarterly increase.
These increases in real GDP of non profit institutions serving households and businesses were largely offset by a 0.2% decline in real GDP of non profits serving governments. Real GDP of non profit institutions, excluding those serving governments, grew 1.0% in the fourth quarter, increasing for the fourth consecutive quarter. 
In 2023, the real GDP of non profit institutions rose 2.7%, with non profits serving governments (+3.1%), households (+1.6%), and businesses (+2.0%) all increasing.
Driven by jobs increased in health care and social services, jobs in non profit institutions rose 0.8% in the fourth quarter, the fifth consecutive quarterly increase. The number of jobs in health care rose 1.4% in the fourth quarter following a 1.9% increase in the third quarter. On an annual basis, jobs in health care rose 5.9% in 2023 compared with 2022, one of the highest yearly increases among all activities in the non profit sector.
Jobs in social services rose by 2.6% in the fourth quarter of 2023. Although the number of jobs increased, job vacancies remained unchanged in social services and health care activities.
The nominal GDP of non profit institutions rose by 0.8% in the fourth quarter, largely driven by higher post secondary tuition fees and rising health care costs.
For non profits excluding those serving governments, nominal GDP recorded a similar increase to the third quarter, up 1.4% in the fourth quarter. Overall, non profit institutions represented 8.3% of the economy wide nominal GDP in the fourth quarter, while non profits excluding government represented 2.2%.
On an annual basis, nominal GDP of non profits rose 6.6% in 2023, compared with a 2.7% increase in real GDP, owing to significantly higher prices. Health care (+7.3%) recorded the largest increase in nominal GDP in 2023.
The data visualization product "Quarterly Non Profit Institutions Economic Account: Interactive tool," which is part of Statistics Canada – Data Visualization Products (Catalogue number71 607 X), is available.
As a complement to this release, the data visualization product "Annual Non Profit Institutions Human Resource Module: Interactive tool," which is part of Statistics Canada – Data Visualization Products (Catalogue number71 607 X), is available.
The document "An overview of the Non Profit Sector in Canada: 2010 to 2020," which is part of Latest Developments in the Canadian Economic Accounts (Catalogue number13 605 X), is available.
The Economic accounts statistics portal, accessible from the Subjects module of the Statistics Canada website, features an up to date portrait of national and provincial economies and their structure.
The Latest Developments in the Canadian Economic Accounts (Catalogue number13 605 X) is available.
The User Guide: Canadian System of Macroeconomic Accounts (Catalogue number13 606 G) is available.
The Methodological Guide: Canadian System of Macroeconomic Accounts (Catalogue number13 607 X) is available.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
