Date:
2024-02-27
Article Title:
The Daily — Online hate and aggression among young people in Canada
Article Content:
Released: 2024 02 27
For most Canadians, Internet use is ingrained in everyday life it is used for banking, schooling, remote work, information, services and socialization. Younger generations have grown up with the Internet and this affects the nature of their online interactions and engagements. For instance, in 2023, young people aged 15 to 24 were the most likely to get their news and information from social media (62% compared with 18% of older Canadians). 
Frequent social media and Internet use can place younger people at a higher risk of experiencing or being incited to perpetrate online harms and cyberaggression, from exposure to harmful online content to cyber related hate crimes and other acts of cyberbullying, such as sexual exploitation targeting specific individuals. 
Today, in advance of Pink Shirt Day (February 28), Statistics Canada is releasing new analysis on cyberaggression among young people, using data from four surveys: the Canadian Social Survey, the Canadian Internet Use Survey (CIUS), the Survey of Safety in Public and Private Spaces (SSPPS) and the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Survey. 
Exposure to online hate and violence can come in many forms. Disinformation and malinformation are types of information that intend to manipulate and exaggerate the truth to cause harm, whereas misinformation refers to news or information that is verifiably false, inaccurate, or misleading, without the intention of harm. All three can contain elements or undertones of aggression and can promote or propagate hate. 
Based on data from the 2022 CIUS, more than 8 in 10 Canadians aged 15 to 24 (84%) saw information online in the year prior to the survey that they suspected to be false, a proportion considerably higher than the national average (70%). Despite this exposure, young people were less concerned about misinformation online (41% versus 59% overall). 
Not only were young people more often exposed to misinformation, but they were also more likely to see content that could incite hate or violence. This type of content can consist of, but is not limited to, terrorist content or violence toward ethnic groups. In 2022, young Canadians aged 15 to 24 were the most likely of any age group to have seen content online over the previous 12 months that incites hate or violence, with 71% reporting seeing media that may incite hate or violence, higher than the national average of 49%. 
Seeing online hate was more common among young Canadians with a disability. Young people aged 15 to 24 with a disability (29%) were over 2.5 times as likely as young people without a disability (11%) to have seen content on a daily basis that may incite hate. There were, however, no differences in the overall volume of exposure to online hate by gender or racialized group among young people aged 15 to 24, though the same content can have a different impact on different viewers. 
Cyber related hate crimes are instances of cyberaggression, and can be linked with other forms of cyberaggression, such as cyberbullying. Cyber related hate crimes, however, have the distinct dimension of hatred toward a person because of their race, ethnicity, gender identity, religion, or other identity. 
Not all cyber related hate crimes are reported to the police. This can be attributed in part to victims choosing not to, or being unable to tell authorities (e.g., fear of reprisal, fear of not being believed or taken seriously, fear of insufficient police response, being restricted or unable to access or communicate with authorities). While cyber related hate crimes are underreported, police reported incidents provide insight on the types of incidents that come to the attention of the police. 
Based on data from the UCR Survey, the overall number of cyber related hate crimes, directed at any age group, has increased from 2018 to 2022, from 92 reported incidents in 2018 to 219 incidents in 2022. Of the cyber related hate crimes that took place from 2018 to 2022, 82% were violent and 18% were non violent. Uttering threats (36%) was the most common type of cyber related violent incident from 2018 to 2022, followed by indecent or harassing communications (29%). Among non violent cyber related hate crimes, public incitement of hatred (52%) accounted for more than half of the incidents. 
From 2018 to 2022, cyber related hate crimes targeting Black people and those motivated by a person's sexual orientation were the most common types of cyber related hate crimes reported to police, representing 17% each. These were followed by hate crimes targeting the Jewish population (12%). 
Those mostly likely to be victims of cyber related hate crimes differ from those who were most often the target of cyberbullying. Young women and girls were more often the target of online bullying and abuse, especially of a sexualized nature. Yet, from 2018 to 2022, men and boys (53%) were slightly more likely than girls and women (47%) to be the victims of police reported cyber related hate crimes. The notable exception was in the teen years and early adulthood, when young women accounted for a greater share of police reported cyber hate crime victims than young men (see Chart 2). 
While the median age of victims of cyber related hate crimes was 32 years, nearly one quarter (23%) of victims were aged 12 to 17, the highest proportion among all age groups. Those aged 25 to 34 (18%) accounted for the next highest proportion of victims. 
Much like the perpetrators of online cybervictimization in general, those accused of cyber related hate crimes reported to police were more often male, and typically younger. From 2018 to 2022, a vast majority (87%) of people charged with or suspected of cyber related hate crimes were men or boys. 
The median age of cyber related hate crime perpetrators was 27 years for both males and females. More than one third (35%) of those accused of cyber related hate crime were 12 to 17 and another one quarter (25%) were 18 to 34. 
Although men and women aged 15 to 24 are equally likely to see content that may incite hate or violence, from 2018 to 2022, boys aged 12 to 17 were charged or accused in 30% of cyber related hate crimes, while girls of the same age accounted for 5% of all those accused or charged. 
Other types of online content and behaviour can also be insidious, including those sexually exploiting and harassing victims. These forms of online harms were more often directed at young women. For instance, while the rate of exposure to intimate images or videos that may have been shared without the person's consent was the same for young men and women, young women are more likely to be specifically targeted. According to data from the 2018 SSPPS, among young people aged 15 to 24, women (11%) were more than three times as likely as young men (3%) to be pressured into sending, sharing, or posting explicit videos, images or messages. 
In addition, among young people aged 15 to 24, women (25%) were two and a half times as likely as men (10%) to receive unsolicited sexually suggestive or explicit images or messages. To protect themselves, young women were more likely to block people because of harassment or restrict their own Internet access in avoidance. Bullying and harassment are not confined to the Internet young people who were victims of cyberaggression were also more likely to have experienced other forms of victimization, such as stalking and physical or sexually assault. 
The effects of cyberaggression go beyond the initial experience. The mental health of the victims can be negatively affected and they can experience feelings of alienation, fear and distrust. The rapid and constant sharing of misinformation and violent and hateful media can polarize individuals and communities and foster a space for hate to spread both online and offline. 
The infographic "Young people and exposure to harmful online content in 2022" is now available in the series Statistics Canada   Infographics (Catalogue number11 627 M).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
