Date:
2024-11-05
Article Title:
The Daily — Canadian international merchandise trade, September 2024
Article Content:
Released: 2024 11 05
In September, Canada's merchandise exports decreased 0.1%, while imports fell 0.4%. Consequently, Canada's merchandise trade deficit with the world narrowed from $1.5 billion in August to $1.3 billion in September.
Due to the implementation of the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) Assessment and Revenue Management (CARM) digital initiative, results for September include greater use of estimation to provide a complete picture of Canada's merchandise imports. Please see the Note to readers section below for more details.
Consult the "International trade monthly interactive dashboard" to explore the most recent results of Canada's international trade in an interactive format. 
Following a drop of 1.4% in August, total exports edged down 0.1% in September, a third consecutive monthly decrease. Despite this decline, more product sections increased (six) than decreased (five) in September. Lower prices were behind the monthly decrease in nominal exports; in real (or volume) terms, total exports rose 1.4%. 
Exports of metal and non metallic mineral products decreased 5.4% in September. This was mainly the result of lower exports of unwrought gold, silver, and platinum group metals, and their alloys a category largely composed of unwrought gold which decreased 15.4% in September. Lower exports of refined gold to the United Kingdom, as well as lower transfers of gold to the United States, contributed the most to the decline. Despite the monthly decrease, exports of unwrought gold, silver, and platinum group metals, and their alloys were up 32.1% so far in 2024 compared with the same period in 2023.
Exports of energy products decreased 2.6% in September, mostly because of lower exports of crude oil ( 3.1%), which were down on lower prices. This marks a second consecutive monthly decline in crude oil prices as concerns over future oil demand continued in the month.
Exports of aircraft and other transportation equipment and parts (+10.3%) partially offset the overall decrease in September, mainly because of higher exports of aircraft. These exports tend to increase in the last month of a quarter, and in September 2024 they rose more than they typically do. There were higher shipments of private jets to the United States in the month. Exports of aircraft were up 9.9% since the beginning of 2024 compared with the same period in 2023. In 2023, these exports had reached their highest level since 2015. 
Exports of forestry products and building and packaging materials (+5.3%) also increased in September. This was mainly the result of higher exports of pulp and paper (+12.2%). Exports of pulp and paper were back to more typical levels in September after falling 13.2% in August, a decline that coincided with rail transport work stoppages during that month.
Following a 0.5% increase in August, total imports decreased 0.4% in September. In real (or volume) terms, total imports were essentially unchanged in September.
Imports of metal and non metallic mineral products decreased 12.7% and contributed the most to the overall decline in September. Following an increase of 65.9% in August, imports of unwrought gold, silver, and platinum group metals, and their alloys ( 46.4%) posted the largest decrease in the product section. Since the beginning of the year, large monthly fluctuations have been observed in import values within this category. Fewer imports of unwrought gold from Switzerland and the United Kingdom were observed in September.
Imports of energy products (+13.6%) partially offset the overall decline in September. Imports of refined petroleum energy products rose 18.7%, contributing the most to the increase. This gain follows four consecutive months of lows for imports of refined petroleum energy products. In September, there were higher imports from Singapore, the United States and the Netherlands.
Imports within the "special transactions" category amounted to $2.4 billion in September, which represents almost double the August value. Estimates to account for outstanding September records related to the implementation of the CARM initiative are largely reflected in this category. A significant proportion of the value for September within this category is expected to be reallocated to other product categories as revisions are applied going forward (see the Note to readers below).
Exports to the United States were up 1.6% in September, partly because of higher exports of aircraft and unwrought gold. Meanwhile, imports from the United States increased 0.8%. As a result, Canada's merchandise trade surplus with the United States widened slightly from $7.8 billion in August to $8.3 billion in September.
Exports to countries other than the United States fell 5.3% in September. Lower exports to the United Kingdom (unwrought gold) contributed the most to this drop. Exports to Switzerland (unwrought gold) were also down in September.
Imports from countries other than the United States fell 2.3% in September. Lower imports from Switzerland (unwrought gold) and the Netherlands (passenger cars and light trucks) contributed the most to the decrease.
Canada's trade deficit with countries other than the United States widened slightly from $9.3 billion in August to $9.6 billion in September.
After rising 0.3% in the second quarter, exports edged down 0.2% in the third quarter of 2024. Exports of motor vehicles and parts ( 3.8%) contributed the most to the quarterly decrease. 
Meanwhile, imports edged down 0.1% in the third quarter. After a strong second quarter, imports of motor vehicles and parts ( 6.0%) were the largest contributor to the decline. This was partially offset by higher imports of metal and non metallic mineral products (+7.1%). 
Canada's quarterly merchandise trade deficit widened slightly from $2.8 billion in the second quarter to $3.0 billion in the third quarter.
In real terms (calculated using chained 2017 dollars), exports increased 0.3% in the third quarter. Exports of energy products posted the largest quarterly increase, in part because of the new crude oil deliveries from Western Canada via the Trans Mountain pipeline. Meanwhile, real imports edged down 0.2% in the third quarter, led by lower imports of motor vehicles and parts ( 5.7%). 
Imports in August, originally reported at $65.4 billion in the previous release, were essentially unchanged in the current reference month's release. Exports in August, originally reported at $64.3 billion in the previous release, were revised to $64.0 billion in the current reference month's release.
In September, monthly service exports were up 1.6% to $17.2 billion. Meanwhile, imports of services edged up 0.3% to $18.4 billion.
When international trade in goods and services are combined, exports edged up 0.2% to $81.1 billion in September, while imports decreased 0.3% to $83.5 billion. As a result, Canada's total trade deficit with the world went from $2.9 billion in August to $2.5 billion in September.
The product "International trade monthly interactive dashboard" (Catalogue number71 607 X) is now available. This new interactive dashboard is a comprehensive analytical tool that presents monthly changes in Canada's international merchandise trade data on a balance of payments basis, fully supporting the information presented every month in the Daily release.
The product "The International Trade Explorer" (Catalogue number71 607 X) is now available online. 
The online Canadian International Merchandise Trade Database is no longer available. It has been replaced by the Canadian International Merchandise Trade Web Application (Catalogue number71 607 X), a modern tool that provides trade data users with a number of enhancements.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
