Date:
2024-07-22
Article Title:
The Daily — Extended wastewater monitoring to influenza viruses in Canadian cities, August 27, 2023 to June 9, 2024
Article Content:
Released: 2024 07 22
Influenza (the flu) causes significant societal and healthcare burdens: it can rapidly spread and cause severe illness, exacerbate underlying medical conditions, and lead to hospitalization and death, especially among the youngest and oldest populations (see Note to readers).
Since 2020, Statistics Canada and the National Microbiology Laboratory from the Public Health Agency of Canada have been collaborating on the Canadian Wastewater Survey to monitor the spread of SARS CoV 2 in participating cities across Canada. Testing for influenza and the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) were added in 2022 to monitor trends and provide insights into recent flu seasons in selected cities. This includes both influenza A and B, the main influenza viruses that cause the seasonal outbreaks in humans.
The influenza season is a period with elevated influenza activity. The start of influenza season is declared when the percentage of positive laboratory tests on individuals potentially affected by influenza is above 5%. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada (see Note to readers), the current flu season started nationwide on the last week of November 2023, a bit ahead of the previous season.
The results of the wastewater analysis show that while all participating cities observed elevated flu levels at some point over the course of the winter of 2023 2024, they did not occur at the same time across cities or for the same duration. Flu A and flu B started circulating at sustained high levels earlier in the West of the country, first in Edmonton, and later moved East to Montréal and Halifax. Levels of flu A were consistently high although variable for longer stretches of time in Metro Vancouver and Toronto than in the other cities.
Flu season began the last week of November 2023 in Metro Vancouver, British Columbia, when wastewater levels reached a level considered high (see Note to readers). Flu A levels in the wastewater of Metro Vancouver continued to climb, peaking the last week of December 2023, then generally remained high until the end of February 2024 and moderate from March onwards. During early February, flu B started circulating at higher levels in wastewater and remained high until the end of May before returning to low levels by early June.
The 2023 2024 flu season began the earliest in Alberta, during the first week of November 2023, and is so far reported as being the most severe in the province in the last five years, according to the Government of Alberta. In Edmonton, Flu A levels were high from mid November 2023 to mid January 2024. Flu B viral signals emerged in the wastewater of Edmonton during the second week of December 2023; levels were moderate until early February 2024, then peaked in early March before declining in April and May. Data were not consistently collected at the end of December and early January. 
Overall, according to Toronto Public Health, Toronto saw an average to below average number of confirmed flu outbreaks during the 2023 2024 flu season compared to historical averages. Flu A levels in the wastewater of Toronto rose in early November 2023 when, according to Toronto Public Health, the number of reported cases of influenza jumped from 19 to 50. Wastewater flu A levels peaked in Toronto in December just before the holiday season and remained high from late November 2023 to early March 2024. Flu B levels in wastewater rose quickly at the beginning of February and remained high until the end of April.
Flu A started circulating in wastewater in Montréal at moderate levels at the end of November 2023. During the December holiday season levels rose to high, peaking first in mid January 2024 and again in mid February. Levels remained high until the end of February. Flu B wastewater levels in Montréal started to rise in early February and fluctuated between high and moderate until the end of May. Data were not consistently collected during December 2023. 
Wastewater flu A levels in Halifax were low until January 2024. They were high and variable until March. Like in Montréal, flu A in wastewater peaked later than in the other cities. Flu B wastewater levels rose in February and fluctuated between moderate and high since then. Flu B levels in wastewater were highest in April and peaked again in the second half of May and dropped to low in June.
Flu A and flu B started circulating first in the West of the country while patterns of duration of high viral levels were also very different between the cities. More research is needed to precisely explain how these patterns and the differences between cities are related to infections in the population, considering wastewater monitoring strengths and limitations. However, several years of coupled wastewater and clinical data support that the trends are very similar for COVID 19, flu, and RSV, indicating that wastewater analysis can be an early warning sign and can support our understanding of the spread of infectious diseases by complementing other epidemiological indicators on the burden of flu such as number of hospitalizations or deaths.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
