Date:
2024-07-26
Article Title:
The Daily — Municipal government financial statistics, 2020
Article Content:
Released: 2024 07 26
Today, Statistics Canada is publishing an update of the Municipal Financial Data Dashboard.
This dashboard provides comparable financial data and indicators at the municipal level. Not only does it show data for units over time, but it also allows for the comparison of units side by side and of multiple units.
The financial data in the dashboard include three main sections: the statement of operations, the balance sheet and government spending according to the Canadian Classification of Functions of Government (CCOFOG). Data are presented by default as total dollars, in thousands, with the option to change to a per capita presentation.
The financial data included in the dashboard can be used not only to observe the results of operations and the financial situation for a specific municipal government but also to compare municipalities as different as, for example, Vancouver, British Columbia, and St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador. 
For example, we can compare financial data from 2020 for both of these municipalities. Although this is a COVID 19 pandemic year, it represents the most recent year for which data are available on the dashboard. Under the total dollars option, Vancouver's revenue is higher than that of St. John's, which is reasonable given Vancouver's larger size. However, St. John's shows higher revenue and expenses per capita than Vancouver. In addition, revenue breakdowns indicate differences in the composition of revenue. St. John's shows higher values per capita of taxes and grants than Vancouver but a lower value of revenue per capita from sales of goods and services. 
The impact of size is also observed in the balance sheet section. In 2020, all assets and liabilities categories were higher in total dollars for Vancouver than St. John's. However, St. John's had the highest level of liabilities per capita, with an increase in loans and debt securities liabilities in 2020.
Government spending by function shows the same size effect, where values in total dollars are higher in Vancouver than in St. John's for all available categories. Under the CCOFOG, comparisons between municipalities are subject to government responsibilities, which may affect levels of spending. In general, spending by function in St. John's and Vancouver has remained stable over the years.
The financial indicators section covers nine types of indicators. The own source revenue, defined as total revenue minus grants, is a basis for other indicators and, as it carries a size effect (bigger municipalities will show higher amounts), other derived indicators offer more comparability.
For 2020, Vancouver shows a higher ratio of own source revenue to total revenue than St. John's, despite the lower contribution of taxes, because of higher sales of goods and services. At the same time, Vancouver shows a higher own source revenue to total expenses ratio. Because the ratio is above 1, revenue from grants is not required for covering expenses during the year. Meanwhile, St. John's' ratio is below 1, meaning revenue from grants is partially required for expense coverage.
On the balance sheet side, the own source revenue for future transactions uses the difference between financial assets and liabilities in proportion to the own source revenue. This indicator can be positive or negative. In 2020, it was positive for Vancouver, indicating an excess of financial resources after obligations are covered, but it was negative for St. John's, indicating the opposite.
The data visualization product "Municipal Financial Data Dashboard," which is part of Statistics Canada – Data Visualization Products (Catalogue number71 607 X), has been updated with additional cities.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
