Date:
2024-01-10
Article Title:
The Daily — Study: Gaps in prescription insurance coverage
Article Content:
Released: 2024 01 10
Having a prescription drug insurance plan is an important pathway to pharmaceutical access and overall better health. While many Canadians (79%) have some type of access to prescription drug insurance, the level of coverage can vary widely across benefit plans, resulting in possible differences in the ability to fill prescriptions and to adhere to healthcare provider recommendations (e.g., taking the correct dose).
A new study released today confirms that cost related non adherence to prescription medication was highest among those with either no insurance plan or a government sponsored plan, and lowest among Canadians with an employer sponsored or private plan. Cost related non adherence to prescription medication is an indicator in Canada's Quality of Life framework. 
Using data from the Canadian Community Health Survey 2015, 2016 and 2019, this study examines differences in insurance coverage by plan types, highlighting possible disparities across sex, racialized groups, immigrant status, household income and employment status. 
Overall, employer sponsored drug insurance plans were the most common form of insurance coverage among Canadians, with 55% of the population in 2019 having this type of coverage. This was followed by government sponsored plans (21%), private plans (6%) and association sponsored plans (5%). 
The study revealed that not all Canadians had equal access to employer sponsored drug insurance plans. One of these gaps was between immigrants and the Canadian born population. Close to 50% of recent and established immigrants had employer sponsored drug plan, compared with 56% of those born in Canada. This pattern was evident for both men and women. 
Among racialized groups, Chinese women (45%) and men (44%) had the lowest rates of employer sponsored drug insurance coverage. This compares with 56% for non racialized men and for non racialized women. Some racialized groups had rates of employer sponsored coverage similar to the non racialized population, namely South Asian women (53%) and South Asian men (52%). 
Coverage from government sponsored plans was also not equal across all groups, with some Canadians having a greater reliance on government sponsored plans, possibly to compensate for a lack of employer sponsored plans. Those most likely to have a government sponsored plan included seniors, people with chronic conditions, people with lower incomes, part time workers, those not employed and the self employed. 
For instance, government sponsored plans were the most common type of plan among senior women (54%) and senior men (51%). In comparison, a much smaller share of working aged women (aged 25 to 64) (13%) and working aged men (12%) depended on these types of insurance plans. 
For individuals with five or more chronic conditions, almost half had a government sponsored plan, compared with slightly over 1 in 10 of individuals without a chronic condition. 
For those in the lowest income quintile, approximately 4 in 10 had government sponsored drug insurance coverage, compared with slightly over 1 in 10 of those from the highest income quintile. 
The article entitled "Exploring gaps in prescription drug insurance coverage among men and women in Canada using an intersectional lens" is now available in Insights on Canadian Society (Catalogue number75 006 X).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
