Date:
2024-02-14
Article Title:
The Daily — Study: The school closest to home: Proximity of French-language elementary schools and enrolment in the Maritime provinces
Article Content:
Released: 2024 02 14
In 2021, in the Maritime provinces, nearly three quarters (72%) of elementary school aged children eligible for instruction in French were attending or had attended French language elementary school. This proportion was higher among children with at least one parent who spoke French most often at home (92%) and among those who lived closer to a French language school than to an English language school (89%). 
The results are based on a new study released today, "The school closest to home: Proximity of French language elementary schools and enrolment in the Maritime provinces." 
Using data from the 2021 Census and the 2022 Open Database of Educational Facilities, the study examines the role played by English and French school proximity in the enrolment in French language schools in the Maritime provinces. Since elementary school is a pivotal place for learning and socialization in the lives of young children, attending French language schools is important for the intergenerational transmission of language and the preservation of the language.
The location of the school in relation to the family home plays a central role in the choice of a school, as it has an impact on commuting time, as well as the mode of transportation. Proximity of schools is the most frequent reason given by parents to explain why children eligible for instruction in French outside Quebec attend an English language school. 
In the Maritime provinces, the majority of children eligible for instruction in French lived near a French language elementary school. In 2021, three quarters (75%) of these children lived within 10 km of the nearest French language elementary school, and nearly one quarter (24%) lived less than 2 km away. 
A larger proportion of children eligible for instruction in French lived closer to a French language elementary school (51%) than to an English language school (49%). This was particularly true in municipalities where at least half of the population had French as their first official language spoken. In these municipalities, 89% of these children lived closer to a French language school than to an English language school. 
Children were also more likely to live near a French language elementary school when parents spoke French at home or had attended a French language school themselves. For example, children with at least one parent who spoke French most often at home were nearly four times as likely (69%) to live closer to a French language elementary school than to an English language school, compared with children whose parents did not speak French at home (18%). 
In 2021, in the Maritime provinces, the majority (72%) of children eligible for instruction in French were attending or had attended a French language school. The remaining children had studied in a French immersion program (10%) or had not received education in French (18%). 
A higher proportion of children eligible for instruction in French had attended a French language school when the elementary school closest to home was French (89% compared with 56% when the closest school was English). 
The distance between home and the nearest French language school had little impact on enrolment in French language schools when the nearest school was French. However, the enrolment rate decreased considerably when the school closest to home was English. For example, the proportion of children eligible for instruction in French who had attended a French language school was 87% when the nearest elementary school was French and located less than 2 km from the family home but was 69% when another elementary school an English language one was even closer, within the same 2 km boundary. 
Although enrolment in French language schools was strongly influenced by the language of instruction of the elementary school closest to the family home, the language spoken most often at home by parents was the factor most strongly associated with enrolment in these schools. 
In fact, the vast majority (92%) of children eligible for instruction in French had attended a French language school when at least one parent spoke French most often at home, compared with less than one third (29%) of those whose parents did not speak French at home. 
The article "The school closest to home: Proximity of French language elementary schools and enrolment in the Maritime provinces" is now available in Insights on Canadian Society (Catalogue number75 006 X).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
