Date:
2024-03-08
Article Title:
The Daily — Federal members of Parliament and federal members of Cabinet across Canada
Article Content:
Released: 2024 03 08
Statistics Canada's Centre for Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Statistics (CGDIS) has released new findings on the gender representation of federally elected and appointed representatives. These data tables are part of the Gender Results Framework (GRF), first introduced by the Government of Canada in 2018 to track the progress of gender equality in Canada.
In recognition of International Women's Day, the CGDIS has also released an infographic titled "Gender representation among Canadian members of Parliament and Cabinet," which provides a brief overview of gender representation in Canada's House of Commons and Cabinet.
The GRF can be accessed through the CGDIS's Sex, Gender and Sexual Orientation Statistics Hub.
The CGDIS's Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Statistics Hub also supports Statistics Canada's Disaggregated Data Action Plan by connecting users to portals that feature disaggregated data on populations with various sociodemographic characteristics.
Reporting on the gender representation of federally elected officials in government helps to promote equity in leadership and democratic participation across Canada. A balanced distribution of women and men throughout all levels of decision making in Canada leads to better decisions and is essential to a fair and democratic society.
The House of Commons is comprised of members of Parliament (MPs) who are elected to represent the population of their respective electoral districts, or constituencies, while the Senate is comprised of representatives appointed by the Governor General to represent Canada's regions, provinces and territories. This release includes data on MPs elected to the House of Commons and excludes data on senators.
The proportion of women who are MPs has increased since 1997, when 79.4% of MPs were men and 20.6% were women. In 2023, 69.4% of MPs were men and 30.6% were women.
The Governor General, on the advice of the Prime Minister, appoints elected MPs from the House of Commons to Cabinet to set priorities and policies at the federal level.
The proportion of women who are members of Cabinet has increased since 2002, when 75.7% of members were men and 24.3% were women. In 2023, men made up 51.3% of Cabinet, while women made up 48.7%. 
For more information on the GRF and products disaggregated by gender, please visit the Sex, Gender and Sexual Orientation Statistics Hub.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
