Date:
2024-11-28
Article Title:
The Daily — Canada's balance of international payments, third quarter 2024
Article Content:
Released: 2024 11 28
Canada's current account balance (on a seasonal adjusted basis) posted a $3.2 billion deficit in the third quarter, narrowing $1.5 billion from the previous quarter. This decline reflected an increase in the investment income surplus and was partially offset by a lower trade in services surplus. The third quarter marked the ninth consecutive quarter in which the current account balance was in a deficit position.
In the financial account (unadjusted for seasonal variation), inflows of funds from abroad to finance the current account deficit in the third quarter came primarily from foreign investment in Canadian debt securities. This was attributable to non resident investors significantly increasing their holdings of Canadian bonds for a third consecutive quarter. Moreover, foreign direct investment in Canada surpassed Canadian direct investment abroad, also contributing to the net inflow of funds. 
The trade in goods and services balance posted a $3.1 billion deficit in the third quarter, a $1.6 billion increase from the second quarter. The trade in services surplus narrowed by $1.5 billion to $0.5 billion over the same period, as the travel services and commercial services surpluses both declined. Meanwhile, the trade in goods deficit widened slightly to $3.6 billion.
The travel services surplus narrowed to $2.3 billion in the third quarter, as imports increased 3.6% and exports declined 2.6%. Higher travel expenditures by Canadians in other countries contributed to the growth in imports. Meanwhile, the decline in exports was largely due to lower expenditures by tourists and temporary workers in Canada. 
Imports of commercial services increased 1.4% to $29.8 billion in the third quarter, as research and development services, computer services and trade related services rose.
Exports of commercial services were down 0.6% to $31.7 billion in the third quarter, largely due to lower receipts of research and development services. Financial services exports were robust in the first three quarters of 2024, led by commissions on securities and financial intermediation services. 
Exports of goods decreased 0.4% to $191.8 billion in the third quarter, largely due to lower exports of motor vehicles and parts ( 4.9%). Higher exports of consumer goods (+4.2%) moderated the overall decline. 
Imports of goods were down 0.3% to $195.4 billion in the third quarter. Imports of motor vehicles and parts ( 5.1%), which increased in the second quarter (+6.1%) led the decline in the third quarter. There were also lower imports of aircraft and other transportation equipment and parts ( 14.4%) in the third quarter, as imports of ships and aircraft declined following strong increases in the previous quarter. Higher imports of consumer goods (+3.0%) and metal products (+6.4%) partially offset the declines.
The investment income surplus increased from $1.7 billion in the second quarter to $4.3 billion in the third quarter. Profits earned by Canadian direct investors on their assets abroad rose in the third quarter, particularly in the mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction sector and the finance and insurance sector. 
Foreign investment in Canadian securities remained strong, at $51.5 billion in the third quarter, following a $66.4 billion investment in the previous quarter. Foreign investors acquired $141.9 billion of Canadian securities in the first three quarters of 2024, a significant increase compared with investments totalling $32.8 billion for the entire year of 2023. The investment activity through the third quarter of 2024 largely targeted the Canadian bond market. 
Foreign investors acquired $49.8 billion of Canadian bonds in the third quarter, following strong acquisitions in the first two quarters of the year. Furthermore, investors increased their holdings of Canadian shares by $4.5 billion, a first investment following six quarters of divestment. Canadian share prices, as measured by the Standard & Poor's/Toronto Stock Exchange composite index, increased by 9.7% in the third quarter. 
Canadian investors acquired $20.9 billion of foreign securities in the third quarter, an investment level comparable with that of the previous quarter ($20.7 billion). Investors acquired both equity (+$17.4 billion) and debt securities (+$10.7 billion) in the third quarter, largely US instruments. 
In the third quarter, foreign direct investment in Canada slowed but remained strong, at $27.1 billion, following a significant $41.6 billion investment in the previous quarter. Mergers and acquisitions activity (+$14.3 billion in the third quarter) contributed the most to the investment for a second consecutive quarter. Earnings reinvested by foreign parents in Canadian affiliates totalled $6.6 billion, up from $5.5 billion in the second quarter. The manufacturing sector was the largest recipient of foreign direct investment in the third quarter.
Canadian direct investment abroad slowed to $13.0 billion in the third quarter, down from $34.8 billion in the second quarter. Earnings reinvested by Canadian parent companies into their foreign affiliates accounted for most of the activity. Meanwhile, mergers and acquisitions slowed to $2.0 billion, the lowest level since the first quarter of 2021. In the third quarter of 2024, the largest share of the investment abroad was in affiliates of Canadian finance and insurance firms. On a geographical basis, most of the investments were in the United States.
The document, "Revisions to 2022 and 2023 exports of travel services," which is part of Latest Developments in the Canadian Economic Accounts (Catalogue number13 605 X), is available.
The product Canada's international trade and investment country fact sheet (Catalogue number71 607 X) is available online. This product provides easy and centralized access to Canada's international trade and investment statistics, on a country by country basis. It contains annual information for nearly 250 trading partners in summary form, including charts, tables and a short analysis that can also be exported in PDF format.
The Economic accounts statistics and International trade statistics portals are available from the Subjects module of the Statistics Canada website.
The Methodological Guide: Canadian System of Macroeconomic Accounts (Catalogue number13 607 X) is available.
The User Guide: Canadian System of Macroeconomic Accounts (Catalogue number13 606 G) is also available.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
