Date:
2024-09-06
Article Title:
The Daily — Measures of fentanyl consumption in the wastewater of Canadian cities, January 2022 to November 2023
Article Content:
Released: 2024 09 06
Drug use in Canada has become a significant public health concern, with opioid use, addiction, and resulting deaths standing out as particularly pressing issues. In the context of the ongoing opioid crisis in many parts of Canada, wastewater data can provide information to contribute to a better understanding of current drug use and emerging trends.
The Canadian Wastewater Survey (CWS) measures the levels of 10 different drugs including opioids such as fentanyl in the wastewater of selected Canadian cities. The latest data from the CWS can now be accessed through a new interactive dashboard entitled "Levels of Drugs in the Wastewater of Canadian Cities"; this includes new data, released today, for the months of July, September and November 2023.
This dashboard allows users to explore the monthly CWS data from the participating municipalities of Halifax, Montréal, Toronto, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Edmonton and Metro Vancouver.
Norfentanyl is one notable example of a substance that has been measured in wastewater across Canada. Norfentanyl is a byproduct of fentanyl breakdown in the body that can be detected in wastewater to estimate fentanyl consumption (see Note to readers). Fentanyl is an opioid drug of particular concern, as it was implicated in more than 80% of apparent accidental opioid toxicity deaths in 2023, according to the Public Health Agency of Canada.
Wastewater data showed that levels of norfentanyl were four to five times higher in Metro Vancouver compared with all other participating cities throughout 2022 and 2023. However, from January to September 2023, norfentanyl levels declined steadily. Further, although the most recent data indicate a large increase in norfentanyl levels from September to November 2023 (the reason for which is currently unknown), they were at or below those seen in late 2022. Meanwhile, data from the British Columbia Coroner Service show that the proportion of deaths involving fentanyl (or similar drugs known as analogues) in Vancouver was similar in 2022 and 2023.
Toronto and Edmonton also had higher levels of norfentanyl in 2022 compared with most other participating cities, though they were well below levels in Metro Vancouver. Although, like Metro Vancouver, the most recent data for Toronto and Edmonton for 2023 show that levels were at or below those seen in 2022. Data for Toronto also indicate that deaths due to opioid toxicity were similar in 2022 and 2023.
Norfentanyl levels in the other participating cities Halifax, Montréal and Saskatoon were well below the levels seen in Edmonton, Toronto and Metro Vancouver in 2023. For Halifax and Montréal, levels were low in 2022 as well. For Saskatoon, this represents a notable decrease compared with 2022, when levels were more like those seen in Edmonton and Toronto.
Fentanyl is just one of many drugs, including other opioids like oxycodone and stimulant drugs like cocaine and methamphetamine, that have been contributing to the ongoing drug crisis in Canada. Further in depth analyses of the levels of these and other drugs in wastewater from the CWS, alongside data on hospitalizations, deaths and crime related statistics, will provide greater insights on drug use in Canada.
The dashboard "Levels of Drugs in the Wastewater of Canadian Cities" presents provisional monthly estimates of the levels of amphetamine, cannabis, cocaine (benzoylecgonine), codeine, fentanyl (norfentanyl), ecstasy, methadone, methamphetamine, morphine and oxycodone in the wastewater of Halifax, Montréal, Toronto, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Edmonton and Metro Vancouver.
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
