Date:
2024-01-31
Article Title:
The Daily — Study: What is the connection between working from home and the languages used at work?
Article Content:
Released: 2024 01 31
Working from home increased significantly during the COVID 19 pandemic. Almost 1 in 4 (24.3%) Canadian workers worked from home at the time of the 2021 Census of Population, compared with less than 1 in 10 (7.4%) workers at the time of the 2016 Census. 
In 2021, in the regions of Moncton, Montréal and Ottawa–Gatineau, people who worked from home used English at work more than other workers. They were also more likely to use both official languages at work.
These results are based on a new study released today, entitled "What is the connection between working from home and the languages used at work?"
Using 2021 Census data, the study examines the connection between working from home and the languages used at work. The article focuses on three case studies the census metropolitan areas (CMAs) of Moncton, Montréal and Ottawa–Gatineau three regions where both English and French are widely used at work.
Overall, in Canada, home based workers (81.7%) were slightly more likely than other workers (75.6%) to use English as their primary language of work.
More specifically, in the Montréal CMA, 56.3% of home based workers primarily used French at work, compared with 74.8% of their non home based counterparts. In addition, home based workers (32.8%) in the Montréal CMA were nearly twice as likely to work primarily in English as other workers (16.8%).
Similar, yet less pronounced, patterns were observed in the Ottawa–Gatineau and Moncton CMAs.
Home based workers differ in various ways from other workers, which could account for their different language practices at work.
For example, there are more home based workers in certain occupations and sectors where this work arrangement is possible. In 2021, a large proportion of people working in professional, scientific and technical services (57.8%), finance and insurance (57.7%) and information and cultural industries (54.9%) worked from home. Conversely, the proportion of home based workers was lower in transportation and warehousing (10.6%), construction (9.7%), retail trade (9.2%) and accommodation and food services (5.3%).
In addition, working from home was more common among workers who knew English. For example, in the Montréal CMA, the work from home rate was higher among bilingual English–French workers (30.5%) and those who knew English but not French (28.7%) than among workers who knew French but not English (11.9%). 
The use of English or French at work can be largely explained by the characteristics of jobs and workers.
Similar to the propensity to work from home, the use of languages at work varied greatly by occupation and industry sector. For example, in the Montréal CMA, one third of workers in professional, scientific and technical services (33.8%) and information and cultural industries (32.2%) worked primarily in English, compared with one tenth of workers in construction (10.1%) and with 12.6% of those in health care and social assistance.
When occupation, language and socio demographic characteristics of home based workers and other workers were taken into account, the differences between the two groups of workers, in terms of language used at work, considerably decreased.
However, after accounting for differences in their occupation, language and socio demographic characteristics, there were still differences between home based workers and other workers in terms of using French at work.
For example, in Montréal, home based workers (66.7%) remained less likely than other workers (71.6%) to use French as their primary language at work, even when both groups of workers had similar characteristics. This means that other factors associated with home based work not considered in this study, such as employer or work environment characteristics, may explain the languages home based workers used at work.
The article entitled "What is the connection between working from home and the languages used at work?" is now available in Insights on Canadian Society (Catalogue number75 006 X).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
