Date:
2024-03-04
Article Title:
The Daily — Discrimination and racism in sports in Canada
Article Content:
Released: 2024 03 04
Several athletes have publicly denounced harassment, abuse and discrimination in sports behaviours that occur in both competitive and recreational sports. These behaviours can take many forms and represent a barrier to participation in sports for certain groups, such as racialized people and those from the 2SLGBTQI+ community.
The data, released today, are based on data from the most recent wave of the Survey Series on People and their Communities, which examined participation and experiences in community sports. These results examine unfair treatment, racism and discrimination in sports in Canada.
In 2023, one quarter (25%) of Canadians felt that racism and discrimination were problems in community sports in Canada. 
In addition, among Canadians who participated in a sport in the five years preceding the survey, 18% said they had experienced or witnessed unfair treatment, racism or discrimination in sport. 
Certain population groups were more likely to experience or witness unfair treatment, racism or discrimination in a sport. For example, lesbian and gay Canadians (42%) were more than twice as likely as heterosexuals (17%) to report having experienced or witnessed such behaviour. 
In addition, the likelihood of experiencing or witnessing unfair treatment, racism or discrimination in a sport decreased with age. Among those who participated in a sport, this likelihood peaked among young people aged 15 to 24 (30%), then gradually declined to its lowest level among people 65 and older (7%). 
Racialized people (26%) were also more likely than their non racialized counterparts (15%) to have experienced or witnessed unfair treatment, racism or discrimination while playing a sport. This was particularly true for Black (34%), Filipino (32%) and Korean (32%) people, who were among the most likely to report having experienced or witnessed these behaviours.
The motivation most often cited by victims and witnesses in incidents of discrimination was race or skin colour (64%), followed by physical appearance (42%) and ethnicity or culture (38%). 
A significant share of victims and witnesses also reported sex (23%), language (22%), religion (21%) and sexual orientation (20%) as reasons for the discrimination committed against them or other sports participants.
No one is spared from discrimination and racism, whether they are participants, coaches, officials or sports team presidents. However, at the time of the incident, most people who experienced or witnessed unfair treatment, racism or discrimination in a sport were participants, athletes or spectators, rather than those in positions of authority, such as coaches, instructors, referees, or sports managers. 
A higher percentage of people who experienced or witnessed unfair treatment, racism and discrimination in the previous five years were either participants/athletes (80%) or spectators (26%) at the time of the incident, as opposed to coaches, referees or those occupying other non athletic roles (5% to 15%). Similar patterns were observed among both victims and witnesses. However, witnesses (85%) were more likely than victims (64%) to be participants or athletes at the time of the incident. Meanwhile, victims (42%) were more likely than witnesses (25%) to be spectators. 
Participants and athletes (64%), spectators (39%), as well as coaches and instructors (36%) were also most often responsible for acts of discrimination. In fact, they were much more likely than referees or officials (10%), or than managers, directors and administrators (13%) to commit such acts. 
The most common types of discrimination reported by victims and witnesses involved being made to feel uncomfortable, such as through insensitive jokes or remarks (60%), or being called names, insulted or mocked (48%). This was followed by being ignored by others or excluded from conversations or group activities (44%) and people talking behind the person's back (42%). 
However, a considerable proportion of victims and witnesses also reported having experienced or witnessed threats or harassment (20%), and physical attacks or assaults (8%). 
In many cases, witnesses of discrimination, racism and unfair treatment sought to comfort the victim (42%) and/or defended or confronted the instigator (37%). Some also reported the incident (25%) and sought help from others (18%). 
However, in many cases, witnesses observed the incident without taking any action to help the victim or stop the instigator (36%). Some witnesses even participated in the assault by joining in with the instigator (7%). 
Many of these incidents were never reported by the victim or the witnesses (32%). Nevertheless, almost one quarter (23%) of victims and witnesses said they reported at least one incident officially, that is, by filing, for example, an official complaint or report. An even larger proportion of victims and witnesses (35%) said they informally reported the incident, such as by telling a teammate, friend or a family member, or discussing it on social media. 
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
