Date:
2024-10-15
Article Title:
The Daily — Access to prescription insurance and medication use during the COVID-19 pandemic among First Nations people living off reserve, Métis and Inuit in the provinces, 2021
Article Content:
Released: 2024 10 15
Lack of access to prescription insurance has been linked to adverse health impacts, particularly for marginalized populations who experience a higher burden of pre existing conditions and inadequate access to health care. 
A new study, titled "Access to prescription insurance and medication use during the COVID 19 pandemic among First Nations people living off reserve, Métis and Inuit in the provinces" explores topics such as prescription insurance coverage, medication needs, and non adherence to prescription medication due to cost within the Indigenous and non Indigenous populations. 
In the spring of 2021, about one in seven First Nations people living off reserve (14%), one in five Métis (21%), one quarter of Inuit (24%E) (see Note to readers), and one in five non Indigenous people (21%) reported having no prescription insurance coverage in the 12 months prior to the survey. 
Non Status First Nations people living off reserve (23%) were nearly twice as likely to report having no prescription insurance coverage in the year prior to the survey compared to Status First Nations people living off reserve (12%). 
The proportion of Indigenous people who had medication needs in the 12 months prior to the survey varied across groups, ranging from over half of Inuit (56%) to 7 in 10 Métis (70%). About two thirds of First Nations people living off reserve and non Indigenous people had medication needs during this period (67%). 
Compared with non Indigenous people, First Nations people living off reserve and Métis were significantly less likely to require medication to treat cardiovascular conditions but were more likely to require medications to treat other conditions such as mental health conditions and chronic pain. The largest difference was for medications to treat mental health conditions; the proportion of Indigenous people requiring these medications was almost 10 percentage points higher than that of non Indigenous people (First Nations people living off reserve: 27%, Métis: 27%, Inuit: 26%E, and non Indigenous people: 18%). 
Among individuals with medication needs, 11% of First Nations people living off reserve, 12% of Métis, 23%E of Inuit, and 9% of non Indigenous people reported not adhering to their prescription medication because of cost (e.g., delayed filling prescription, skipped doses). However, within each identity group, those who lacked full year prescription insurance coverage (i.e., had no coverage or had part year coverage) were two to three times more likely to not adhere to medications because of cost than those who had full year coverage in the 12 months prior to the survey. 
The publication "Access to prescription insurance and medication use during the COVID 19 pandemic among First Nations people living off reserve, Métis and Inuit in the provinces" is now available as part of the Indigenous Peoples Thematic Series (Catalogue number41200002).
For more information, or to enquire about the concepts, methods or data quality of this release, contact us (toll free 1 800 263 1136; 514 283 8300; infostats@statcan.gc.ca) or Media Relations (statcan.mediahotline ligneinfomedias.statcan@statcan.gc.ca).
