Article Content:
 Executive Summary

Geopolitical shocks continue to have a significant impact on the international trade system worldwide. For instance, the United States and China are engaged in fierce economic competition driven by protectionist policies and trade rules aimed at reshaping value chains. The ongoing war in Ukraine highlights the immense impact of geopolitical events on global trade: strict trade sanctions on both sides and the complete restructuring of the European markets in energy and raw materials. The conflict between Israel and Hamas in Gaza is leading to significant instability in a key region for many global supply networks: another example of a geopolitical shock that is affecting world trade.

With Brexit and the COVID-19 crisis (and the associated global lockdowns and disruptions in production chains) still fresh in the memory, unchecked globalisation is also subject to increasing scrutiny. Calls for less dependence on foreign countries are growing louder, particularly in areas like medicines, energy, and critical raw materials, for instance. Terms like ‘offshoring’ and ‘outsourcing’ are increasingly being replaced in societal debates by ‘re-shoring’, ‘near-shoring’, ‘friend-shoring’, and ‘decoupling’. The coming years will reveal to what extent Dutch firms are adopting these strategies. Globally, many firms seem to be exploring the opportunities for parallel supply chains in order to become more resilient. Geopolitical events are not the only reason for this shift in attitudes. Global poverty and inequality, the effects of climate change, and technological developments – particularly in artificial intelligence – are also casting a new light on globalisation.

The latest news on globalisation and other reports, such as the Internationalisation Monitors, can be found in our .

Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures 2024: Export, import and investments is published by the CBS Expertise Centre for Globalisation at the request of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It aims to provide objective information for a broad readership on internationalisation trends in Dutch business and the Dutch economy more generally. Furthermore, it offers independent data for trade policy decisions by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The publication provides data tables with annually recurring key figures as well as an outline of the main events behind these figures.

Listed below are some of the main findings presented in this edition :

Chapter 2: Major developments in 2023 and 2024

This chapter focuses on important recent economic developments. The first paragraph provides an overview of trends in the trade in goods between the Netherlands and China, compared to trade with other Asian countries. The second section describes trends in the trade in critical raw materials and products that contain critical raw materials. The third and last section switches the focus to the United Kingdom and describes trends in trade with this country four years after Brexit.

Trade in goods with China and other Asian countries

China is the largest Asian supplier of goods to the Netherlands by far. The importance of China within Dutch trade with South, East and Southeast Asia has not changed dramatically since 2015. Nevertheless, the Chinese share of total Dutch imports of goods has decreased slightly in recent years. This is partly due to lower Chinese export prices in 2023. The value of imports of Chinese phones, computers, office machines and televisions has risen less than that of imports from other Asian countries.

When it comes to goods exports from the Netherlands, the importance of China has increased in recent years but this is mainly due to one product group: specialised machines and equipment. Without this product group, exports to China would have grown less than exports to other Asian countries in the period 2021–23.

China is the largest purchaser of Dutch goods bound for South, East and Southeast Asia, but the difference with other countries is smaller than is the case for Dutch imports, and the value of Dutch exports to China is also significantly lower than the value of Dutch imports from China.

The number of Dutch goods traders who trade with China is much larger than those trading with other countries in the Asian region, and China is also home to the most enterprises that are ultimately controlled in the Netherlands. The number of Dutch goods traders with India and Vietnam grew significantly in the period 2015–2021.

There are a number of reasons why enterprises make changes with respect to the countries they trade with. This can happen due to geopolitical risks or because of totally unrelated factors such as growing wage differences between China and other Asian countries. It is also possible for trade routes to change without any fundamental changes to the production chain. This research does not provide any insights regarding the specific motives for the changes made by enterprises.

Imports of products containing critical raw materials

The Netherlands is a major importer of products containing critical and strategic raw materials, but the vast majority of these imports ultimately end up abroad. These are mainly part of the transit trade or re-exports, although a smaller quantity of goods are exported after the raw materials have been processed in the Netherlands. In relative terms, more of the imports of products containing critical raw materials are destined for the Dutch market. Moreover, the import value of products containing critical raw materials is much larger than the import value of critical raw materials.

Aluminium, nickel, coking coal and copper are mostly imported as raw materials by the Netherlands. Many products containing aluminium, nickel and copper are also imported. This is not the case for coking coal, since this is hardly ever found as an element in other products. Rare earth metals and scandium are, by contrast, hardly ever imported as raw materials but are found in many other products imported by the Netherlands.

China is the ninth largest supplier of critical and strategic raw materials to the Netherlands, but is the leading supplier of products containing critical raw materials to the Netherlands.

Phones, laptops/tablets, medical supplies and solar panels are among the main imported products containing critical raw materials. When it comes to imports from China, laptops/tablets, solar panels and phones predominate.

Trade in goods with the UK four years after Brexit

The export of goods to the United Kingdom has lagged behind exports to other countries since Brexit, primarily due to a drop in re-exports. Additionally, the quasi transit of goods to the UK has declined significantly. Conversely, Dutch re-exports and quasi transit to other countries have seen a substantial increase.

The value of domestic exports to the UK increased during the period 2015–2023, and also the period 2022–23. This includes products such as food and beverages and mineral fuels. However, in Q1 of 2024, the value of domestic exports fell slightly.

In terms of exports, since Brexit the balance between re-exports and domestic exports has shifted in favour of the latter.

Imports from the UK have kept pace reasonably well with imports from other countries, but the import value declined sharply in 2023. This was likely due to a significant fall in the price of mineral fuels.

British data indicates that UK trade with the Netherlands did not decline more than UK trade with other (EU-)countries.

Chapter 3: International trade in goods

Dutch goods exports in 2023

Dutch goods exports declined by 5.9 percent in 2023, to a total of 686.6 billion euros. Re-exports fell by 6.7 percent, slightly more than the 5.1 percent drop in domestic exports.

This decline in export value was due to a drop in both volume and price, with the price decrease (–‍3.2 percent) playing a larger role than the volume decrease (–‍2.7 percent).

Notably, the lower price of mineral fuels and chemical products, along with the decline in the volume of mineral fuels, contributed to the absolute decrease in the value of goods exported in 2023.

Europe remained the primary export destination, as in previous years, with 77 percent of Dutch export value going to European countries. Germany, Belgium and France were again the Netherlands’ most important markets for Dutch goods within Europe in 2023.

Machines and equipment were the most exported items (by value) in 2023, followed by manufactured goods and mineral fuels.

Dutch goods imports in 2023

Dutch goods imports fell by 8.9 percent to a total of 614.9 billion euros in 2023, a steeper decline than goods exports.

The decrease in import value was due to a 5.5 percent price decline and a 3.4 percent drop in volume.

The lower price of imported mineral fuels and chemical products was largely responsible for the decline in import value, along with the volume decline in imported manufactured goods and mineral fuels.

The most important import categories by value were manufactured goods and machines and equipment. Mineral fuels dropped to the third most significant import category.

Germany, the US and Belgium were the primary countries of origin by import value. Imports from Russia and China declined significantly in 2023.

Importance of the Netherlands in world exports and imports

In 2022, the Netherlands accounted for 2.9 percent of global exports. In terms of global goods exports, the Netherlands ranked sixth after China, the US, Germany, Japan and South Korea. China exported the most goods of any country in the world, with a share of exports of 15.7 percent in 2022.

Globally, the Netherlands ranked sixth as a goods importer in 2022, following the US, China, Germany, Japan and France. The Netherlands contributed 3.3 percent to global goods imports in 2022. The US remained the largest importer with a share of total goods imports of 13.1 percent by trade value.

How important is the Netherlands as a trading partner for other economies?

Of all goods imported into Belgium in 2022, nearly 19 percent (by value) came from the Netherlands, making it the top country of origin for Belgian goods imports. For Sweden and Germany, the Netherlands was the second most important supplier.

The Netherlands increased its share of Austrian and Taiwanese goods imports in 2022 compared to the previous year. However, the Dutch share of German, UK and Czech goods imports decreased.

The Netherlands is also a significant destination for goods exported from various countries. In 2022, 27 percent of all goods exported from Iceland were destined for the Netherlands, making it Iceland’s primary export destination. Similarly, the Netherlands ranked first for goods exports from Cameroon, and was the third for Belgium in 2022.

The Dutch share in Norwegian goods exports decreased in 2022. However, the Netherlands increased its share of goods exports from Hong Kong in 2022. The Dutch market share of Russia’s export value was 4.5 percentage points lower in 2022 compared to 2021, before the war broke out in Ukraine.

Chapter 4: International trade in services

Dutch services exports in 2023

In 2023, the Netherlands exported services worth 290.8 billion euros to foreign countries. This represents a 5.5 percent increase compared to 2022.

Based on the National Accounts – which exclude Special Purpose Entities (SPEs) – there was an increase in services exports of 4.8 percent. The export volume is estimated to have decreased by 1.3 percent compared to 2022, while export prices are estimated to have risen by 6.2 percent. This indicates that the growth in export value was entirely attributable to significantly higher export prices.

With a share of 30.5 percent, business services were once again the largest category of services exported by the Netherlands by value in 2023. Transport services and telecommunication, computer, and information services complete the top three.

Germany, the US, UK, Ireland and France were the main destinations for Dutch services exports in 2023. These five largest export partners accounted for 47.6 percent of the Dutch services export. The Germans, Americans, and British primarily purchased business services and transport services from us.

The US was the most important destination for Dutch business services in 2023. For the export of telecommunication, computer, and information services, Ireland was the top destination. Germany was the largest recipient of Dutch transport services by value in 2023.

Dutch services imports in 2023

In 2023, the total import of services increased by 4.8 percent compared to 2022, amounting to 273.3 billion euros.

Based on the National Accounts – which exclude Special Purpose Entities – there was an increase in services imports of 8.2 percent. The import volume increased by much less than import prices, at 0.5 percent and 7.7 percent, respectively.

Business services dominated imports in 2023 with a share of 34.9 percent, followed by transport services and charges for the use of intellectual property.

The US, UK, Germany, Ireland and France were the main sources of services imports into the Netherlands in 2023. These five largest import partners accounted for 57.5 percent of the Dutch services imports. Charges for the use of intellectual property dominated imports from the US. For imports from the UK, it was business services. Services imports from Germany consisted mainly of business services and transport services.

The UK was the most important supplier of business services to the Netherlands in 2023, while Germany was the main supplier of transport services. In terms of value, US imports were dominant in charges for the use of intellectual property in 2023.

The Netherlands as an international service provider in 2022

The international figures are sourced from the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The most recent figures are from 2022.

2022 was a record year for the international trade in services, with the highest value of services ever traded in global terms.

In 2022, the Netherlands provided 3.8 percent of all globally exported services, making it the ninth-largest services exporter in the world. The US is the largest services supplier by far.

In Belgium, the Netherlands was the largest service provider. In 2022, 13.8 percent of Belgium’s service imports came from the Netherlands. The Netherlands is a prominent supplier of services related to freight transport as well as business services.

The Netherlands as an international service consumer in 2022

In 2022, the Netherlands imported 4 percent of all globally imported services, making it the seventh-largest services importer in the world by value. The US, China and Germany are the largest importers of services in the world, although China’s importance has declined significantly in recent years.

Belgium exports the most services to the Netherlands; 13.6 percent of Belgium’s total services exports are destined for the Netherlands. Romania and Lithuania also export a relatively large amount of services to the Netherlands, primarily due to the freight transport sector.

Chapter 5: Foreign direct investment and multinationals

Foreign direct investment (excluding SPEs)

As in 2021 and 2022, the US and the UK remained the most important partner countries for both Dutch inward FDI and outward FDI in 2023.

Total inward FDI fell to 3,404 billion euros in 2023, a decrease of 8 percent compared to 2022. Total outward FDI amounted to 4,245 billion at the end of 2023, a decrease of 6 percent from the previous year. For both incoming and outgoing investments, this is the lowest level in five years.

Multinationals in the Netherlands

In 2022, there were around 26.4 thousand Dutch multinational firms, representing 2 percent of the Dutch business economy. However, at 98 percent, the majority of the Dutch business economy was still made up of non-multinationals, two-thirds of them operating as self-employed persons.

Some 19 percent of jobs in the Dutch business economy were provided by foreign multinationals and 18 percent by Dutch multinationals. Dutch multinationals employed more people, in relative terms.

Foreign and Dutch multinationals were most likely to be active in the wholesale and retail trade sector, at 37 percent and 30 percent respectively, compared to 20% of the total Dutch business economy.

A quarter of employment in the Netherlands was provided by the wholesale and retail trade sector. This picture was unchanged compared to previous years. For multinationals, the share of employment in the wholesale and retail trade sector was even higher at 29 percent.

In 2022, about 1 in 5 foreign multinationals in the Netherlands were from the US (3,130 firms). Neighbouring countries also accounted for a significant proportion of foreign multinationals active in the Netherlands. Germany, the UK, Belgium and France together accounted for about 44 percent of foreign multinationals in the Netherlands.

In absolute terms, firms from Germany, France and the UK topped the list of largest employers. Belgian multinationals provided relatively few jobs in the Netherlands. While US and German multinationals employed an average of 85 and 76 people, respectively, Belgian multinationals employed an average of 38.

Swiss multinationals in the Netherlands generated the most turnover per employee (FTE). In 2022, it was 1,446 thousand euros per employee (FTE), an increase of 21 percent compared to the previous year. Chinese multinationals and US multinationals followed in second and third place.

Multinationals exported goods worth 411.0 billion euros and imported goods worth 482.3 billion euros in 2022. In services, the export value was 207.9 billion euros and an import value of 193.5 billion euros. Multinationals thus had a trade deficit in goods in 2022, but a trade surplus in services.

About two-thirds of multinationals were two-way traders. In addition, a large proportion of multinationals were importers, followed by non-traders. With an average of 10 percent, only a limited proportion of multinationals were exporters only. The distribution was different among non-multinationals: two-thirds of non-multinationals did not participate in international trade in 2022.

Dutch multinationals abroad

Germany remained the most popular country for Dutch multinationals to invest in. The number of subsidiaries of Dutch multinationals in Germany increased further to 3,610 in 2022. The US and Belgium followed in second and third place respectively.

In 2022, the majority of employees working at Dutch subsidiaries were in the US with 420 thousand employees. 69 percent of this employment was created by subsidiaries in trade.

At an average of 615 people per firm, Dutch subsidiaries in Ukraine employed the most people in relative terms, driven by firms in mineral extraction and manufacturing. Belgium, with an average of 43 people per Dutch subsidiary, employed the fewest people in relative terms.

Subsidiaries of Dutch multinationals in the US had the highest turnover per employee (FTE). This increased from 592.4 thousand euros to 605.5 thousand euros per employee (FTE) from 2021 to 2022. Subsidiaries in Germany and France followed with 475.9 thousand euros and 441.7 thousand euros in turnover per employee (FTE), respectively.

Chapter 6: Dutch earnings from exports

Contribution of exports to GDP

The export of Dutch goods and services amounted to 899 billion euros in 2022, an increase of about 23 percent compared to 2021. This growth was largely due to price changes; in terms of volume, exports were about 5 percent higher than the previous year. Exports of goods of Dutch origin increased by 2 percent, re-exports grew by 25 percent, and service exports by 19 percent.

Earnings from exports were 337 billion euros in 2022, nearly 17 percent more than the previous year. Added value from service exports increased the most (up by 19 percent), while earnings from domestic exports increased by 16 percent, and earnings from re-exports by 9 percent.

Export earnings per euro of gross exports averaged 37 euro cents in 2022, slightly lower than in previous years. This decline was caused by domestic exports (down from 55 cents in 2021 to 53 cents in 2022) and re-exports (down from 12 cents to 11 cents). Service exports still yielded 65 cents per euro of gross exports, unchanged from 2021.

In 2022, 35.1 percent of the Dutch GDP was earned from goods and services exports, 1.9 percentage points more than in 2021. This was mainly due to domestic exports (particularly machinery and equipment, and natural gas) and the export of services (notably air and sea transport and travel).

GDP grew by 4.3 percent in 2022 compared to 2021. Service exports were largely responsible for this growth, contributing 1.6 percentage points, while domestic exports and re-exports contributed 0.1 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively.

Sectors with significant earnings from exports include the industrial sector, business services and trade. In particular, manufacturing, transportation and storage, and mineral extraction sectors saw their export earnings increase in 2022 compared to 2021. Within the industrial sector, earnings from machinery and equipment and petroleum increased significantly in 2022.

The mineral extraction and petroleum sectors experienced significant price increases along with a decline in gross export volume. The export volume of the chemical sector also declined. The metals and building materials sectors saw high price increases accompanied by an increase in export volume. The export volume of the pharmaceutical, machinery and equipment, and food sectors increased.

Looking at specific categories of domestic exports, specialist machinery and equipment, natural gas, petroleum products, transport equipment, flowers and plants, and fruits and vegetables generate relatively high earnings for the Netherlands.

In terms of export destinations, the Netherlands earns the most from exports to Germany, the UK, Belgium, France, and the US. China was the only country in the Netherlands’ top 10 export markets where export earnings did not grow in 2022.

Employment related to exports

31.4 percent of employment (or 2.6 million full-time jobs) in the Netherlands is related to exports. This includes 1.1 million direct jobs and 1.5 million indirect jobs (FTE).

Of the employment generated by exports, 45 percent is attributable to exports of Dutch-made goods, 42 percent to service exports, and 12 percent to re-exports.

Business services and trade generate relatively high indirect employment thanks to exports, while in the industrial sector, many jobs are directly dependent on exports.

Men, people with a lower level of education, and self-employed persons spend more hours on export-related work, in relative terms.

Chapter 7: Use of imports in the Dutch economy

In 2022, the total import value of goods and services amounted to 795.2 billion euros, of which 621.3 billion euros was related to goods and 173.9 billion euros to services. Total import value was 25.4 percent higher than in 2021. The increase was mainly due to higher import prices for goods.

The Netherlands plays an important role in European intra-regional trade. A large part of the imports that are processed in exports (50.4 billion euros, representing 22.7 percent of total intermediate imports) came from within the EU-27 and went to the same or another EU-27 country.

Distribution of goods imports

More than half of all goods imports (312.6 billion euros) were destined for re-export in 2022, and this share has been on the rise in recent years. Goods imports destined for direct domestic consumption had a value of 78.4 billion euros in 2022. Intermediate goods imports amounted to 230.3 billion euros in 2021: 34 percent of these were processed by Dutch firms to produce goods or services that were sold on the domestic market and 66 percent were exported after processing in the Netherlands.

In 2022, crude oil and petroleum products was the most important category of goods imported for re-exports. Crude oil and petroleum products was also the largest category of intermediate goods imports: 80 percent was further processed into exported goods or services. Imports of goods for direct domestic consumption were dominated by road vehicles, natural gas and clothing.

Imported goods destined for re-export came mainly from Germany and China in 2022. Germany and Belgium were the most important import partners for intermediate goods imports and imports intended for direct domestic consumption.

Distribution of services imports

Around 5 percent of service imports (9.4 billion euros) in 2022 were destined for re-export. Service imports destined for direct domestic consumption had a total value of 27.2 billion euros, 2 percent more than in 2019. Intermediate service imports amounted to 137.3 billion euros in 2022. Some 35 percent of these were further processed by Dutch firms into goods or services that were sold on the domestic market while 65 percent were exported abroad after processing in the Netherlands.

Business services was the largest category of intermediate service imports, with 57 percent being further processed into exported goods or services. Service imports destined for direct domestic consumption amounted to 15.1 billion euros in travel services, 4.9 billion euros in ICT services and 4.3 billion euros in business services.

With respect to intermediate service imports, the US and the UK were the most important import partners. Services intended for domestic consumption came mainly from Germany and the US.

Unravelling export-related imports

A total of 56.8 billion euros in imports of raw materials and mineral fuels and 20.3 billion euros in industrial products were required in order to produce exports in 2022.

There is a high degree of dependence on the EU-27 for imports that are incorporated into exports of industrial products (69 percent from EU-27), food and beverages (64 percent) and machinery and chemical products (63 percent).

In 2022, a total of 25 billion euros in imports of business services and 13.8 billion euros in transport services were required to produce exports.

Most of these imported services came from the EU-27 in 2022. Both the EU-27 share and the shares of the main export markets remained virtually unchanged compared to a year earlier.

Chapter 8: Footprint of Dutch imports

Land use footprint of Dutch imports

The total land use footprint of Dutch imports is approximately 43 million hectares, almost 13 times the land area of the Netherlands. Only 12 million hectares of this footprint relate to imports that remain in the Netherlands, but that is still almost four times the land area of the Netherlands.

More than 53 percent of the total land use footprint of imports consists of agricultural fields, but for imports that ultimately leave the Netherlands this is almost 57 percent. This is followed by forests at 26 percent and pastures at almost 20 percent. Land use for mining has a share of less than 1 percent.

The food and beverage industry, which imports many agricultural products, accounts for the largest share of the land use footprint for intermediate imports with land use of approximately 11 million hectares, followed by that of the wood, paper and printing industries at almost 2 million hectares.

The land use footprint of (intermediate) imports for direct and indirect domestic consumption is fairly concentrated in Germany in terms of agricultural fields and in Russia in terms of forests. When it comes to intermediate imports for export and imports for re-export, there is a higher concentration of agricultural use in Argentina and Brazil and forest areas in Brazil. The use of pasture in all import flows is relatively highly concentrated in China.

Material footprint of Dutch imports

The material footprint of Dutch imports amounted to 1,687 megatons (1 megaton = 1 billion kilogrammes) in 2020. Of this, 32 percent were fossil energy sources, 31 percent non-metallic minerals (such as sand, gravel and clay), 27 percent biomass and 11 percent metals.

The majority of these raw materials, 867 megatons were used for intermediate imports. These mainly consisted of non-metallic minerals (324 megatons) and fossil fuels (318 megatons). The majority of the material footprint of the imports for re-export (673 megatons) and for domestic consumption (147 megatons) consisted of biomass. Of the total metals footprint of Dutch imports, the majority was intended for re-export.

The petroleum sector accounts for the largest share of the material footprint of Dutch intermediate imports for export at more than 150 megatons, mainly crude oil and natural gas. The construction sector accounts for the largest share of the material footprint of Dutch intermediate imports for domestic production at more than 150 megatons, mainly consisting of non-metallic minerals.

The biomass footprint of Dutch imports is relatively widely dispersed, with a relative concentration in Germany and to a lesser extent Brazil. The use of fossil fuels for Dutch imports was strongly concentrated in Russia for all import flows in 2020. The footprint for metals and non-metallic minerals was relatively highly concentrated in China for Dutch imports for direct domestic consumption and imports for re-exports, but for intermediate imports these uses were more concentrated in South America and Germany, respectively.

Greenhouse gas footprint of Dutch imports

The total greenhouse gas (GHG) footprint of Dutch imports amounted to 505 megatons of CO 2 equivalent (about 1 percent of the world total in 2020, Ritchie et al., 2024). This includes emissions of carbon dioxide (264 megatons of CO 2 eq.), carbon dioxide from biomass as an energy source (74 megatons of CO 2 eq.), nitrous oxide (60 megatons of CO 2 eq.) and methane (107 megatons of CO 2 eq.).

The largest share of this GHG footprint is caused by imports destined for abroad: 232 megatons of CO 2 eq. for imports for re-export and 145 megatons of CO 2 eq. for intermediate imports intended for export. Imports for direct domestic consumption had the smallest GHG footprint (55 megatons of CO 2 eq.). For intermediate imports intended for domestic consumption, the footprint was 71 megatons of CO 2 eq.

The food and beverages industry accounts for the largest share of the GHG footprint of all Dutch intermediate imports: one-fifth of the total. The share of the construction sector in the GHG footprint of Dutch intermediate imports for domestic consumption is relatively large (almost 21 percent); for the chemicals sector this applies to its share in the GHG footprint of intermediate imports for exports (15 percent).

The GHG footprint of Dutch imports is highly concentrated in China: more than 18 percent of GHG emissions related to imports for direct domestic consumption take place in China, almost nine percent of those related to intermediate imports, and almost 16 percent of those related to imports for re-export.





Noten

Chapter 1 comprises a dashboard with the key findings from chapters 2–7 and is not included here.Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures 2024: Exports, imports and investment – An introduction

Geopolitical shocks continue to have a major impact on the international trading system worldwide. For instance, the United States and China are embroiled in fierce economic competition, driven by protectionist policies and trade rules in an attempt to change value chains. The ongoing war in Ukraine is a prime example of the major impact of geopolitical events on global trade: severe trade sanctions back and forth and a complete restructuring of the European energy and raw materials market. The conflict between Israel and Hamas in Gaza creates great instability in a region that lies at the heart of many global supply networks, and is yet another example of a geopolitical shock affecting global trade.

With Brexit, the COVID19-crisis, and related worldwide lockdowns and disruptions to production chains still fresh in our memory, these geopolitical events further fuel the debate on unbridled globalisation. Calls for less dependence on foreign countries, when it comes to medicinal products, energy and critical raw materials, for example, are getting increasingly louder. And, in public debates, terms such as ‘offshoring’ and ‘outsourcing’ are increasingly being replaced by ‘re-shoring’, ‘near-shoring’, ‘friend-shoring’ and ‘decoupling’ (UNCTAD, 2023; WTO, 2023). The coming years will test to what extent Dutch enterprises implement this strategy. Globally, enterprises increasingly seem to be exploring options for building parallel supply chains to become more resilient (The Economist, 2024). At the same time, geopolitical events are not the only reason for this changing mindset. Global poverty and inequality, the effects of climate change, as well as technological developments, particularly in the area of artificial intelligence, also contribute to a shifting narrative about globalisation (The Economist, 2024; WTO, 2023).

Following two years of unprecedented growth, the Dutch import and export value of goods dropped in 2023. This was partly because soaring inflation eased and prices stabilised. However, that is not the full story. The trade volume of Dutch goods trade also dropped in 2023. This applied to both imports and exports. At the same time, the Dutch trade in services grew to a record high. Never before did our country import and export more services than in 2023. Increased service prices were primarily responsible for this. On a global scale, the Netherlands continues to be a key trading partner both in terms of goods and services. The Netherlands steadily maintains its position in the top-ten countries of the different trade flows.

The Netherlands is a trading nation par excellence. And that trade has served our country well. Earnings from domestic exports, re-exports and services amounted to €337 billion for the Netherlands in 2022, which accounted for over 35% of Dutch GDP. And as much as 31.4% of Dutch employment was related to exports. This corresponds to 2.6 million full-time jobs, both directly or indirectly related to Dutch exports of goods and services.

Not everything that the Netherlands imports is actually intended for the Dutch market. Our country serves as a major hub in global trade, which makes it central to the European hinterland. For example, more than half of goods imports were destined for re-exports in 2022. With a share of two-thirds, the intermediate goods imports, which are further processed by enterprises in the Netherlands, also have other countries as the final destination. In the period between 2019 and 2022, the Dutch economy earned relatively less per euro from domestic exports and re-exports. This can be explained by the fact that relatively more imports were used to realise the exports, mainly due to price increases of imported goods. Earnings per euro of exports of services actually increased slightly over the same period.

The Dutch economy and society thus benefit greatly from international trade. We also depend heavily on the imports of goods. Certain raw materials and products are either unavailable or not sufficiently available in the Netherlands. However, there is a downside to this. In 2020, the global land use footprint of Dutch imports was about thirteen times the surface area of the Netherlands. Even excluding re-exports, the land use footprint was still nearly four times the surface area of the Netherlands. This is mostly cropland. The material footprint and the greenhouse gas footprint of Dutch imports amounted to 1,687 billion kilograms and 505 billion kilograms of CO 2 equivalents respectively.

Internationalisation and foreign direct investment are interconnected. They ensure exchange of capital and knowledge between economies, which generally benefits output and prosperity in both countries. The Netherlands plays a major role in this and ranks among the global leaders when it comes to inward and outward investments. The Netherlands invests heavily in the United Kingdom and the United States, and also receives many investments from those countries. Even though Dutch or foreign multinationals make up only two percent of the Dutch business economy, they did create 19% and 18% of employment, respectively, in our country in 2022. Germany continues to be the favourite investment country for Dutch-owned multinationals.

The table below shows a selection of key figures, to be further discussed in this publication. The latest news and reports in the field of globalisation, such as the Internationalisation Monitor, can be found in our .

Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures 2024: Exports, imports and investment has been developed by the CBS Expertise Centre for Globalisation at the request of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This is its sixth edition. The publication contains annually recurring key figures and indicators on the internationalisation of the Dutch economy and businesses, as well as figures on current trends. These key figures, indicators and descriptive trends provide a quick insight into key aspects of international trade and the role of the Netherlands in global production chains.

This publication consists of seven descriptive chapters, generously illustrated with many figures, infographics and tables. These chapters present the key trends, figures and developments for 2023, and, where possible, offer a glimpse into 2024. Where data for 2023 is not available, the latest available figures are used. The datasets that form the basis of the figures, tables and infographics developed in these chapters are so extensive that they have not been included in full here; they can be accessed and downloaded from the landing page of this publication. As customary, the publication begins with a dashboard with infographics, showing an overview of some of the main findings set out in the chapters. The subsequent chapters focus on the following questions:

What are some of the latest developments in the area of international trade (Chapter 2)? This edition zooms in on the so-called ‘China-Plus-One strategy’, the imports of products containing critical and strategic raw materials, and lastly, the trade with the United Kingdom several years after Brexit.

What goods and how much of them does the Netherlands trade, and with which countries (Chapter 3)?

What services does the Netherlands trade, to what extent, and with which countries (Chapter 4)?

How much does the Netherlands invest internationally, and how much do other countries invest in the Netherlands (Chapter 5)?

What does the Netherlands earn from exports, and how much employment is involved in exports (Chapter 6)?

How do goods and services from the rest of the world work their way through the Dutch economy (Chapter 7)?

How large is the Dutch footprint because of imports (Chapter 8)?

What has changed in relation to the 2023 edition?

As mentioned earlier, the publication of Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures contains annually recurring key figures and indicators. This allows for effective tracking of the trends and developments regarding the internationalisation of the Dutch economy and businesses. Yet, in some cases we are required to make changes. In most of these cases, the underlying reasons are methodological changes in statistical output, or the availability of internal and external data. In other cases, these have been deliberate decisions to better match the current information needs.

Each year, Chapter 2 introduces new relevant themes that are trending at that time in Dutch international trade or investments. This year, Chapter 2 features the goods trade with China and other Asian countries, the trade in products with critical and strategic raw materials and the goods trade with the United Kingdom a few years after Brexit.

Because trade value trends do not tell the whole story, this publication pays extra attention to volume and price developments of Dutch trade. In addition to the value trends of the international trade, Chapter 3 now also explains the trends in volume and price of the Dutch goods trade. A more detailed distinction is made between product groups, countries and the key products.

Also, Chapter 6 now breaks down export earnings through domestic exports by products, profits and wages. It also pays extra attention to price and volume developments. It now also splits the hours worked for exports into the level of education and sex.

For the first time, Chapter 7, too, explains the trends in price and volume, in addition to the value development of international trade.

In this edition, the information about the footprint of Dutch imports no longer limits itself to a section in Chapter 7. It was decided that this subject deserves its own chapter. For this reason, this edition of Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures introduced a new chapter: Chapter 8. The transfer to a new data source was made in compiling these figures, from the GLORIA MRIO table to the PBL-FIGARO table. This table offers more information, yet is also more dated.

References



The Economist (2024). . Economist Impact.

UNCTAD (2023). . United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

WTO (2023). . World Trade Organization.



Dashboard



Major developments in 2023 and 2024

Authors: Pascal Ramaekers, Marieke Houben-van Herten

This chapter discusses a number of relevant economic developments that are currently underway. We begin by looking at China. Ever more large firms are considering moving their production or supply lines away from China to nearby countries in Asia. We examine whether these plans are reflected in the economic statistics. In the second section, we focus on products that involve the use of critical raw materials, an area in which China, as a major commodity exporter, again plays a role. The import of products that involve the use of critical raw materials, and the import of critical raw materials themselves, create a complementary picture of other countries’ dependence on natural resources. The third and final section looks at Dutch trade with the United Kingdom in the four years since Brexit. In view of the lack of extensive recent research into the effects of Brexit, it is useful to review developments in trade with the UK once again.

2.1 Key findings

Trade in goods with China and other Asian countries

China is the largest Asian supplier of goods to the Netherlands by far. The importance of China within Dutch trade with South, East and Southeast Asia has not changed dramatically since 2015. Nevertheless, the Chinese share of total Dutch imports of goods has decreased slightly in recent years. This is partly due to lower Chinese export prices in 2023. The value of imports of Chinese phones, computers, office machines and televisions has risen less than that of imports from other countries in South, East and Southeast Asia.

When it comes to goods exports from the Netherlands, the importance of China has increased in recent years but this is mainly due to one product group: specialised machines and equipment. Without this product group, exports to China would have grown less than exports to other Asian countries in the period 2021–23.

China is the largest purchaser of Dutch goods bound for South, East and Southeast Asia, but the difference with other countries is smaller than is the case for Dutch imports, and the value of Dutch exports to China is also significantly lower than the value of Dutch imports from China.

The number of Dutch goods traders who trade with China is much larger than those trading with other countries in the Asian region, and China is also home to the most enterprises that are ultimately controlled in the Netherlands. The number of Dutch goods traders with India and Vietnam grew significantly in the period 2015–2021.

There are a number of reasons why enterprises make changes with respect to the countries they trade with. This can happen due to geopolitical risks or because of totally unrelated factors such as growing wage differences between China and other Asian countries. It is also possible for trade routes to change without any fundamental changes to the production chain. This research does not provide any insights regarding the specific motives for the changes made by enterprises.

Imports of products containing critical raw materials

The Netherlands is a major importer of products containing critical and strategic raw materials, but the vast majority of these imports ultimately end up abroad. These are mainly part of the transit trade or re-exports, although a smaller quantity of goods are exported after the raw materials have been processed in the Netherlands. In relative terms, more of the imports of products containing critical raw materials are destined for the Dutch market. Moreover, the import value of products containing critical raw materials is much larger than the import value of critical raw materials.

Aluminium, nickel, coking coal and copper are mostly imported as raw materials by the Netherlands. Many products containing aluminium, nickel and copper are also imported. This is not the case for coking coal, since this is hardly ever found as an element in other products. Rare earth metals and scandium are, by contrast, hardly ever imported as raw materials but are found in many other products imported by the Netherlands.

China is the ninth-largest supplier of critical and strategic raw materials to the Netherlands, but is the leading supplier of products containing critical raw materials to the Netherlands.

Phones, laptops/tablets, medical supplies and solar panels are among the main imported products containing critical raw materials. When it comes to imports from China, laptops/tablets, solar panels and phones predominate.

Trade in goods with the UK four years after Brexit

The export of goods to the UK has lagged behind exports to other countries since Brexit, primarily due to a drop in re-exports. Additionally, the quasi transit of goods to the UK has declined significantly. Conversely, Dutch re-exports and quasi transit to other countries have seen a substantial increase.

The value of domestic exports to the UK increased during the period 2015–2023, and also the period 2022–23. This includes products such as food and beverages and mineral fuels. However, in Q1 of 2024, the value of domestic exports fell slightly.

In terms of exports, since Brexit the balance between re-exports and domestic exports has shifted in favour of the latter.

Imports from the UK have kept pace reasonably well with imports from other countries, but the import value declined sharply in 2023. This was likely due to a significant fall in the price of mineral fuels.

British data indicates that UK trade with the Netherlands did not decline more than UK trade with other (EU-)countries.

Outline

The second section of this chapter discusses the development of Dutch goods trade with China and other countries in South, East and Southeast Asia. This is followed, in section 2.3, by a description of the development of Dutch imports of products containing critical and strategic raw materials. Section 2.4 discusses the development of Dutch goods trade with the UK four years after Brexit came into effect.

2.2 Goods trade with China and other

Asian countries

China has been an important player in the global economy and international production chains for decades. This is reflected in the statistics for the trade in goods, which is what this section is about. Through the trade in goods, the Netherlands is strongly interwoven with the Chinese economy (Freeman et al., 2022). Increased trade between the Netherlands and China generates various benefits for the Netherlands: access to a bigger market, greater diversity in products, (substantially) lower prices and increased employment. On the export side, the Netherlands also earns money from China, €7.1bn in 2022 or 0.7% of GDP (CBS, 2023a).

However, the increasingly close economic ties between the Netherlands and China are not without risks. We have become more dependent on China. For example, China was responsible for 15% of the import dependence of OECD countries in strategic products in the years 2020 and 2021, whereas the equivalent figure was 4% in the 1997–1999 period. Set against that, China remains more dependent on all the OECD countries combined than vice versa (Arriola et al., 2024). Along with Eastern Europe, Finland and Sweden, the Netherlands is one of the EU countries that is most highly integrated with Chinese production chains (Freeman et al., 2022).

The phenomenon of international companies (partially) withdrawing from China or planning to do so has been dubbed the ‘China-Plus-One strategy’; economies in Southeast Asia are benefiting from this conscious limitation of geopolitical and economic risks by firms (Jongsma & Lalkens, 2024). The decision to move or bring back production may be motivated by a number of reasons, such as rising geopolitical tensions, excessive wage or transport costs, increasing import tariffs due to a trade conflict, power or staff shortages in the proposed production country or fear of logistical disruptions and an excessive dependence on a particular country, as during the COVID-19 pandemic (FD, 2024; Hijink et al., 2022).

Relocation of production was also seen before the pandemic, for example in 2019 with the onset of new tensions between the US and China and previously also due to rising wages in China. Firms that use China as a production hub will be more inclined to shift their activities than those that maintain a presence there for access to China’s large consumer market (Middeldorp, 2019). A CBS study in 2022 showed that India was more popular than China in terms of outsourcing business entities from the Netherlands. The difference was seen primarily in services, such as ICT services. But India was also a more popular country for manufacturing goods and materials (CBS, 2022). More recently, in late 2023, the European Central Bank surveyed 65 large multinationals on this issue. 40% of those firms sourced critical production from China and two-thirds cited China as a risk in terms of future security of supply. Nearly 40% were considering shifting production from the current country of origin – often China – to other countries outside the EU (Grazia Attinasi, 2023).

In this section, we explore whether there is a difference in the development of the Netherlands’ trade in goods with China and its trade in goods with other Asian trading partners. We also look at the number of firms in the Netherlands that trade with Asian trading partners and the number of subsidiaries of Dutch-owned multinationals in Asia. The most comprehensive and recent information is available for the Dutch goods trade with Asian countries, and for this reason this makes up the core of this section.

Slight fall in Chinese share of the value of Dutch goods imports

In the 2015–2023 period, Dutch goods imports from East and South Asia grew roughly as quickly as total Dutch goods imports, resulting in a stable market share. Specifically for China, the share in 2023 was also the same as in 2015 (over 8%); however, in 2020, 2021 and 2022, China had a slightly larger share (9 to 10%). This is partly explained by lower Chinese export prices in 2023. Chinese export goods such as telephones, laptops and solar panels are being offered more cheaply in an attempt to keep the export engine running during a period of reduced domestic demand in China (Nieuwsuur, 2024). The share of Dutch goods imports of the other 26 countries in South and East Asia combined has remained stable since 2015 (10 to 11%).

In the first quarter of 2024, the fall in the Chinese share of total Dutch imports continued, with a reduction from an 8.3% market share (first quarter 2023) to 7.6%. At the same time, the share of the other Asian countries in the first quarter increased from 9.9% to 10.8% because the import value from this region fell by less in relative terms, year on year. The value of imports from China declined by 21% in comparison with the first quarter of 2023, while the value of imports from other countries fell by 5%. In the case of China, roughly half of this significant decrease in import value was caused by lower prices and the other half by lower volume, for example because fewer solar panels were imported. Alongside China, imports from Japan, Singapore, Malaysia and South Korea also fell sharply in absolute terms. Set against that, imports from Taiwan and Thailand increased significantly in the first quarter of 2024, relative to the same period in 2023.

China is the most important supplier of imports in South and East Asia by some distance

In 2023, the Netherlands imported €51bn worth of goods from China (excluding quasi-transit trade), which is far more than from all the other individual countries or territories in South and East Asia, combined. China was followed at some distance by Japan, Vietnam, Taiwan, India and Malaysia as the most important suppliers to the Netherlands. The top 10 was completed by Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Thailand. The top 10 partners together accounted for 92% of total imports from South and East Asia.

Since 2015, the value of Dutch imports from Taiwan, India, South Korea, Singapore and Vietnam have grown faster in percentage terms than imports from China. Looking only at the most recent years (2021–2023), however, two countries really stand out: India (+55%) and Vietnam (+53%). China is lagging behind, with a growth rate of 12%. Between 2022 and 2023, the value of imports from China actually fell, for the first time in seven years. This was partly due to cheaper products from China, as noted previously. Countries such as Vietnam and Malaysia are cited by experts as attractive alternatives to China with an adequate supply of labour, low wages, a technology focus and good education. India in particular boasts a large and growing labour potential (Jongsma & Lalkens, 2024).

Net shift in imports of telephones, computers, office machines and TVs

What do we see at product level? For the most common goods imported by the Netherlands from the entire region, we see a mixed picture characterised by a diminishing significance for China overall. Figure 2.2.3 shows the change in the value of imports from China minus the change in the value of imports from the other Asian countries. In the 2021–2023 period, the import value of telephones from China grew less rapidly than from the other countries. The same was true for computers, refined petroleum products, office machines, televisions, household appliances and shoes. This is subject to the previously mentioned caveat that the differences are partly explained by a fall in export prices in the Chinese manufacturing industry and that it does not necessarily say anything about a shift in import volumes. An analysis of CBS figures shows that Chinese export prices were lower in every quarter of 2023 than in the same quarters of 2022. This applies to manufactured, chemical and other products. The decrease in prices for products from China was greater (–‍8.8%) than the overall fall in prices for imported goods in 2023 (–‍5.5%, see Chapter 3).

Between 2021 and 2023, the import value of telephones from Taiwan, Hong Kong and Vietnam increased substantially and the same was true for computers, office machines and televisions from Vietnam and refined petroleum products from India, Malaysia and Singapore. We also see a striking increase in semi-conductor components and household appliances from the Philippines. Specifically in the 2022–2023 period, the import value of computers, laptops and tablets from Taiwan tripled, while for China it fell by 30%. This appears to reflect an import shift from China to Taiwan (CBS, 2024a).

On the other hand, there are also important categories of imported goods for which imports from China grew faster between 2021 and 2023 than imports from the other 26 Asian countries combined. This applies in particular to semi-conductor components, electrical appliances and devices and electrical power tools, and to a lesser extent also to toys and sports goods. For the period 2022–2023, the rapid growth in imports of electric cars from China stands out. The import value of these goods increased thirteen-fold in the space of a year (CBS, 2024b).

Chinese share of Dutch goods exports increases slightly

Dutch goods exports to Asia are much smaller than imports from Asia. As with imports, we see a stable picture when it comes to Asia’s share of the total Dutch goods trade. The Chinese share did grow slightly, to 2.6% in 2023, compared both to 2015 and to more recent years. It is, however, slightly lower than in the peak year of 2020 (3.0%). The sum of exports to all other South and East Asian countries in 2023 was more than double the exports to China, but in fact the trend over recent years has been slightly downwards. At 5.6%, the share was the same as in 2015.

Top ten export destinations closer to China than top ten suppliers of imports

In 2023, the Netherlands exported €18bn worth of goods to China (excluding quasi-transit trade), making it the most important export destination in South and East Asia. The differences between China and the other countries are, however, smaller than we saw previously for imports. China is followed by South Korea (€10bn), Taiwan (€8bn) and Japan (€5bn). The top ten is completed by Singapore, India, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Indonesia and Thailand. Those ten destinations taken together accounted for 95% of total Dutch exports to South and East Asia.

Of the ten countries listed, the value of Dutch exports has grown the fastest with respect to Taiwan, South Korea and China since 2015, in percentage terms. If we look at a more recent period (2021–2023), alongside China there are two other countries which are growing rapidly as export markets: Vietnam and Indonesia. The Netherlands invests €1.5bn in Indonesia annually, making it the most important investor in that country. It is a large market with a population of 270 million. Along with Vietnam, Thailand, Singapore and Malaysia, Indonesia is one of the five priority Asian trading partners for the Dutch government (Government of the Netherlands, 2022).

Economic growth figures of 4 to 5% for the region as a whole in 2023 were still above the global average, but they were nevertheless low for the region compared to previous years. The World Bank highlights low investment in infrastructure and real estate, low consumption in China, increasing debt for households, firms and governments and sluggish productivity growth throughout the region (World Bank, 2024). These developments may impede the further growth of Dutch exports to these countries.

Higher growth outside China when machinery and equipment exports are excluded

The increased absolute growth shown previously in the value of goods exported to China in the 2021–2023 period, compared with exports to the other Asian trading partners, is explainable. It was entirely due to the stronger growth in exports of machinery and equipment to China in that period, made up almost entirely of specialised machinery such as chip-making equipment.

Without the machinery and equipment product category, there was actually a net shift in exports to the other 26 countries in South and East Asia. The biggest net shift was in industrial products (manufactured goods), followed by transport equipment, raw materials and natural products and chemical products. Examples of strong growth in exports outside China were medical instruments and appliances to Indonesia, aircraft (or aircraft components) to Vietnam and medicaments and pharmaceutical products to South Korea and Japan.

Vast majority of firms trading with China, strong growth for India and Vietnam

For the 2015–2021 period, a good comparison can also be made of the number of importers and exporters with trading partners in Asia. This provides an indication of willingness to trade with particular countries. Data is also available for 2022, but unfortunately due to method breaks it is not readily comparable with previous years. With nearly 22,000 Dutch enterprises importing from China and nearly 5,000 exporters, China was the Asian trading partner with which the largest number of Dutch firms were trading in 2021, followed at some distance by India, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. Over the 2015–2021 period, only the number of importers of goods from Vietnam and India grew faster in percentage terms than the number of importers with links to China (+11%). On the export side, the number of exports grew for all the main trading partners. For five destinations, the greatest growth in the number of exporters was slightly higher than for China (+17%); they were Taiwan, Japan, India, South Korea and Vietnam.

Foreign subsidiaries under Dutch control also primarily located in China

Statistics Netherlands’ Outward Foreign Affiliate Statistics (OFATS) reveal the number of foreign subsidiaries under Dutch control. Directly comparable data is only available for the years 2021 and 2022. In 2022, almost half of the foreign subsidiaries of Dutch-owned multinationals in South and East Asia were located in China. Between 2021 and 2022, the number of firms in China remained virtually the same, but we do observe a fall of 8% in the number of firms in the other countries. The greatest percentage growth is seen in Taiwan, Bangladesh and Myanmar, but the numbers involved are small. No data is available for Vietnam.

2.3 Imports of products containing critical raw materials

Critical and strategic raw materials (see inset) are increasingly in the spotlight worldwide. This is because they are essential for the functioning of our economy and our society. They are important in the context of the green and digital ambitions of the Netherlands and Europe and also for important sectors such as healthcare and defence. Greater dependence on countries outside Europe, such as China, for critical raw materials makes us vulnerable. A supplier could, for instance, abuse its position of power in a raw material supply chain in order to pressurise other countries economically (Government of the Netherlands, 2023).

Critical and strategic raw materials

Based on the current list maintained by the European Commission, there are 34 critical and/or strategic raw materials, with 17 being critical/non-strategic, 15 critical/strategic and two non-critical/strategic (copper and nickel). Critical raw materials have a major economic impact and are associated with a high supply risk and few substitution options. Strategic raw materials are also crucial to our green and digital ambitions and for sectors such as aerospace and defence (European Commission, 2023a). For the sake of readability, the entire group will here be referred to as ‘critical raw materials’.

In March 2024, the Council of the EU adopted a European regulation to reduce dependence on third countries for critical raw materials; the goal is that by 2030, at least 10% of the EU’s annual consumption will be extracted within the union, at least 40% processed within the EU, at least 25% obtained from recycled materials and no more than 65% will come from a third country at any particular stage of processing (Council of the EU, 2024). Alongside security of supply, Europe’s green agenda is also linked to these objectives. For instance, the EU wants to be fully circular and climate neutral by 2050. The latter requires technology such as wind turbines, solar panels and electric cars, and their production is dependent on critical raw materials (CBS, 2024c). Furthermore, there are concerns about the impact of mining outside Europe, for our consumption, on people, the climate, nature and the environment. There are Congolese cobalt mines, for instance, where whole families work for low wages and are exposed to severe health risks to extract cobalt for mobile phone batteries and similar products (Delbert, 2023).

Rich countries bear an additional responsibility when it comes to the use of raw materials. They consume six times as many raw materials as poor countries and their impact on the climate is as much as ten times higher, far more than the earth can cope with (United Nations, 2024). The European Environment Agency emphasises the importance of circularity – making products that last longer and making reuse, recycling and recovery more commercially attractive – an equitable transition and a reduction in demand for raw materials (EEA, 2024). For more information about the footprint of Dutch imports, see Chapter 8 of this publication.

Broadly speaking, critical raw materials can enter our country in two ways. On the one hand, they can arrive unprocessed or barely processed for further processing in the Netherlands or other European countries. On the other hand, they can enter the Netherlands as part of semi-manufactured goods or end products. In 2023, over €17bn worth of unprocessed or barely processed critical or strategic raw materials was imported , which is almost a quadrupling compared to 20 years previously. However, the lion’s share of that was accounted for by price rises, in view of the more limited growth in import weight of approximately 20%. When we look at products containing critical raw materials, the value is much higher than for unprocessed critical raw materials, because here the entire product value counts. In 2023, products worth a full €322bn were imported, which was three times more than in 2003. Here, too, import weight had increased by approximately 20% since 2003. However, underlying these figures there are major shifts, with older technologies slowly being phased out, for example petrol cars, and relatively new technologies advancing quickly, such as electric cars.

Between 2018 and 2022, the value of Dutch solar panel imports grew nearly five-fold and in 2022, the Netherlands was actually the most important importer of solar panels in the world, with the qualification that the majority of those products were re-exported (CBS, 2023b). In addition, the Netherlands is also importing ever more multifunctional technology for the energy transition, such as switchboards, automatic controllers and heat exchangers (CBS, 2024c).

Rare earth metals often imported in product form

Table 2.3.1 compares imports of critical and strategic raw materials (left) with imports of products containing critical and strategic raw materials (right). On the raw materials side, aluminium, nickel, coking coal and copper are by far the biggest imports in terms of value. They account for 87% of the total import value of critical and strategic raw materials. On the product side, aluminium, copper and nickel are also high up on the list, because they are contained in many products. Coking coal, on the other hand, is completely absent, because it barely features as a constituent of other goods but is used virtually exclusively as a raw material, primarily as fuel for smelting metals in blast furnaces.

Rare earth metals , scandium, magnesium, antimony and platinum group metals are in fact commonly imported in product form and seldom in an unprocessed form. For instance, the rare earth metal neodymium is important for magnets in computers, electric cars and wind turbines. China accounts for 93% of the production of permanent magnets made of rare earth metals (European Commission, 2022). The US and Europe are therefore both actively seeking to reduce their dependence on Chinese rare earth metals. In the US, it was recently discovered that they can be extracted relatively easily from existing coal mines in Utah and Colorado (Schonebeek, 2024). The biggest stocks of rare earth metals in Europe were discovered only recently in Norway, but extraction cannot begin until 2030 and will involve nearly €1bn in initial investment (De Maeseneer, 2024).

Source: CBS, partly based on TNO’s Raw Materials Scanner

Note: Products often contain multiple critical raw materials, so multiple raw materials are assigned an import value simultaneously. The whole product value is used here. The Commodity Scanner was used; this indicates which products contain critical raw materials (the exact amount does not matter). See Bohn et al. (2023).

China top supplier of products containing critical raw materials

The dominance of aluminium, coking coal, copper and nickel in Dutch imports (by value), as noted previously, is also reflected in the list of the main suppliers of raw materials. In 2023, the ten biggest suppliers of critical and strategic raw materials (in raw material form) to the Netherlands were Norway, Iceland (primarily aluminium), Australia, the US (primarily coking coal), Russia (primarily nickel), Canada, South Africa (nickel, aluminium), Chile (copper, aluminium), China (many varieties ) and Brazil (niobium). In the first quarter of 2024, we see the same countries on the list, but China is slightly higher in the ranking (moving up from nine to seven).

The list is very different if we look at the main suppliers of products containing critical raw materials, see Figure 2.3.2. Now China is not no longer the ninth-ranked supplier but the first. This is not surprising because China is dominant in many raw materials at multiple stages of processing, from mining to the processing of raw materials from China or from other countries, as well as in manufacturing end products. China is a major manufacturer of end products containing critical raw materials, such as solar panels, laptops and telephones. It should be noted that more than half of Dutch imports from China comprise direct transit trade in foreign ownership. On the other hand, China also supplies goods to the Netherlands indirectly. For instance, Germany is the second-largest supplier of products containing critical raw materials to the Netherlands (and the first excluding transit trade), such as machinery and cars, but these also incorporate Chinese critical raw materials. As such, the dependence on China is even greater than Figure 2.3.2 shows.

In the first quarter of 2024, however, China’s leading position as the largest supplier of products involving the use of critical raw materials over Germany declined sharply and is now minimal. This is partly due to a sharp decline in the import value of Chinese solar panels, which, in turn, is related to lower prices, large (strategic) stocks in Europe (Rystad, 2023) and falling demand (Duintjer Tebbens, 2023). We also see a decrease in the import value of telephones and laptops/tablets from China, which is linked to lower import prices.

Cars and high-tech and healthcare products most likely to contain critical raw materials

Telephones, medicines, laptops/tablets, medical appliances and solar panels head the list of imported products containing critical raw materials. However, much of that is transit trade in foreign ownership. Without that import stream, telephones and medicines do remain at the top of the list, but laptops and tablets drop well down the ranking (from three to nine) and the same applies to solar panels (from five to twelve). Without transit trade, cars are in fourth position, components for specialised machinery (such as chip-making equipment) in fifth and car parts in sixth. There are four product categories that had a lot of imports in 2023 but hardly any or none at all in 2003, namely telephones, components for specialised machinery, artificial joints and solar panels. The leading products which the Netherlands obtains from China are laptops/tablets, solar panels and telephones.

Source: CBS, partly based on TNO’s Raw Materials Scanner

2.4 Goods trade with the UK four years after Brexit

At the stroke of midnight on 31 January 2020, the UK left the European Union – a unique situation, because it was the first time in the history of the EU that a member state had left voluntarily. The desire for ‘(Br)exit’ was a result of an advisory referendum among the UK population in 2016. Following a year-long transitional period, a new Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) came into force on 1 January 2021. We are now more than four years on. What have the consequences of Brexit been for UK-Netherlands trade? This is not an easy question to answer, because this has also been a turbulent period in other areas that have also impacted trade. For instance, the COVID-19 pandemic and the war between Russia and Ukraine. In order to obtain a picture of the impact of Brexit, we will present data on trade with all countries over recent years, in addition to changes in trade with the UK. The latest trade figures for the first quarter of 2024 are also presented here.

Exports fell after Brexit, but the UK remains an important trading partner

The UK is an important trading partner for the Netherlands, both for imports and exports. In the years before Brexit, from 2015 to 2019, the UK was our third most important export partner. In 2020, the year of Brexit, the UK dropped to fourth position while France rose to third place. That remained the same until 2023. In that year, 6% of total exports by value crossed the North Sea. In previous years, the figure had been 8 to 9%. Of all the goods the Netherlands imported in 2023, 5% came from the UK, making the UK the Netherlands’ fifth most important import partner. The position and the percentage have been fairly stable since 2015.

So it is the export of goods to the UK in particular that seems to have changed in the years since Brexit. Figure 2.4.1 below summarises the results that we will delve into in greater detail in the following sections. It shows that re-exports and particularly the transit trade in goods to the UK have fallen since 2020, the year of Brexit. Meanwhile, re-exports and transit trade to all countries have actually grown substantially. Domestic goods exports to the UK have risen, but the increase is significantly less than the increase to all countries.

No decline in domestic exports to the UK

In 2015, the year before the referendum, domestic exports worth €18.9bn went from the Netherlands to the UK. A quarter of those were food and beverages, followed by chemical products and manufactured goods. Following a dip in 2020, the export value rose again, to €26.1bn in 2023. Relative to 2015, that was a rise of 38%. By way of comparison, the export value of domestic goods exports to all countries rose by 57% in the same period; see also Figure 2.4.1. In 2015, 9% of domestic goods exports went to the UK; in 2023, the figure was 8%. The UK therefore appears to have become slightly less important as a market.

In the most recent year for which we have figures, from 2022 to 2023, the export value of domestic goods exports to the UK rose by approximately 1%. Exports to all countries fell by 5%. The latter can be explained by the fact that 2022 was a year in which, partly due to a sharp increase in inflation, trade values rose significantly, whereas in 2023 the situation normalised somewhat because prices fell. In particular, the fall in prices for mineral fuels and chemical products caused a drop in the absolute value of goods exports in 2023. With regard to exports to the UK, the value of food products, mineral fuels and machinery did still increase compared to the previous year, meaning that the total export value of domestic goods to the UK remained slightly positive. However, exports in the other product categories fell in value in 2023.

Looking at exports per quarter, we see that the value of domestic goods exports to the UK in the first quarter of 2024 was 4% lower than in the fourth quarter of 2023. Compared to the first quarter of 2023, it was 5% lower.

Export value of mineral fuels more than doubled

In 2023, food and beverages still made up the largest share of domestic goods exports. They were followed by mineral fuels and chemical products. The value of domestic exports of mineral fuels more than doubled between 2015 and 2023. This was due mainly to price rises and not so much to an increase in volume (also see Chapter 6 on export earnings). The value of machinery and equipment also rose significantly.

In Figure 2.4.3. we examine the category of domestic goods exports to the UK in slightly more detail; the top 15 product categories are shown here. Refined petroleum products are firmly in first place, followed by flowers and plants, and by vegetables and root vegetables in third place. These were also the three most important product categories in 2015. Computers, laptops and tablets, and telephones, modems and routers were not yet in the top 15 in 2015. On the other hand, a relatively large amount of natural gas was exported in 2015, whereas this had dropped out of the top 15 by 2023.

Earnings from exports of Dutch products are substantially higher than, for example, earnings from re-exports or quasi-transit trade (also see Chapter 6 of this publication). The fact that domestic exports to the UK appear to be suffering somewhat less from Brexit than re-exports and transit trade is therefore a positive finding. However, this may be a temporary stay of execution there was an extended exemption period for agricultural products (an important export category for the Netherlands), but this came to an end this year. As of 30 April 2024, UK customs began physically inspecting incoming animal products, plants and plant-based products from the EU at Border Control Posts. This will entail increased waiting times and possibly additional costs (FD, 2024), which may be visible in the figures for Q2 2024. At the time of writing this document, those figures were not yet available.

Impact of Brexit primarily felt in re-exports and transit trade

Re-exports are imported foreign goods which, after being imported into the Netherlands, (temporarily) become the property of a Dutch company but undergo little or no processing and are then exported again, in this case to the UK. Figure 2.4.1 shows that following a number of years of steady increases, in the Brexit year of 2020, re-exports fell to 3% below the figure for 2015, and were still at that level in 2023. Re-exports to the UK totalled €17.0bn in 2023. Of course 2020 was also the year in which the world experienced the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly disrupted trade. However, re-exports to all countries grew in value substantially after 2020 (by 83%). Re-exports to the UK have therefore been lagging well behind by comparison. In 2023, 5% of all re-exports from the Netherlands went to the UK. In 2015, the equivalent figure was 10%.

From 2022 to 2023, re-exports to the UK fell by 2 percentage points, while re-exports to all countries fell by 7%. Looking at exports per quarter, we see that the value of re-exports to the UK in the first quarter of 2024 was 1% lower than in the fourth quarter of 2023. Compared to a year before (first quarter of 2023), it was 2% lower.

Re-exports of mobile telephones and laptops still number 1, but share is falling

The biggest category within re-exports to the UK consists of machinery and equipment. For instance, (mobile) telephones, computers and laptops, but also medical appliances and office machines. In 2015, 43% of the goods fell into this category, with a value of €7.6bn. In 2023, the equivalent share and value fell to 36% and €6.1bn, respectively. This is still the biggest category (in value), followed by manufactured goods and chemical products. Compared to 2015, 2.5 times as much foreign transport equipment was exported in 2023.

Looking in slightly more detail at which product categories in particular were re-exported, Figure 2.4.5 shows that the biggest one was telecommunication equipment, i.e. (mobile) telephones, modems and routers. However, its value has nearly halved since 2015. It may be that these devices are now being exported directly to the UK from countries such as China or nearby Asian countries (see section 2.2). Relatively large quantities of medical instruments and appliances are also re-exported to the UK from the Netherlands, as are other manufactured articles.

Quasi-transit trade to the UK halves after Brexit

Like re-exports, the quasi-transit trade in goods from the Netherlands to the UK was dealt a substantial blow by Brexit. Quasi-transit trade is the import of foreign goods which, in contrast to re-exports, remain in the ownership of a foreign enterprise for the entire time they are in the Netherlands. Quasi-transit trade to the UK fell sharply in recent years, whereas it grew strongly in value to all destinations. See also Figure 2.4.1. In 2022, the transit trade value of goods destined for the UK was worth only slightly more than half (52%) of what it had been in 2015. In 2023, it fell slightly further, to less than half the level of 2015 (45%), or €5.1bn. In the same period between 2015 and 2023, quasi-transit trade to all countries actually increased by 65%. Of total quasi-transit trade from the Netherlands in 2015, 10% was destined for the UK. In 2023, the figure was only 3%.

The fact that exports of originally foreign products (re-exports and quasi-transit trade) in particular, were affected by Brexit is easily explained. The trade treaty between the UK and Europe is based on unrestricted trade without tariffs and quotas, but that only applies to goods whose origins lie within the countries that are party to that trade treaty (Franssen & Rooyakkers, 2021). Franssen et al. (2020) showed that in 2017, on average, 53% of re-exports from the Netherlands to the UK originated from non-EU countries, particularly China and the US. Those goods are probably still subject to import tariffs. It is therefore more attractive for UK companies to import goods directly without a stopover in the Netherlands.

Total exports fall behind and ratio shifts

If we now look at total goods exports to the UK, i.e. domestic goods exports plus re-exports (not including transit trade), in Figure 2.4.6 we see a steady growth from €36.5bn in 2015, the year before the referendum, to €43.1bn in 2023. That seems positive, but if we compare exports to the UK with exports to all countries, we notice that exports to the UK have lagged behind. Export value in particular rose a lot less strongly between 2020 and 2022. This is almost entirely attributable to depressed re-exports, as we saw in the previous sections. From 2022 to 2023, total exports to the UK fell by 0.5%, and in the first quarter of 2024, the export value was also lower than the quarter before (–‍2%) and the first quarter of 2024 (–‍3%). This means that the fall between 2022 to 2023 was less steep than exports to all countries (–‍6%).

Exports to Northern Ireland – part of the UK but still within the European Union for customs purposes – rose strongly between 2022 and 2023, by 24%. This may have slightly tempered the fall in exports to the UK overall, but in view of the fact that the Northern Irish economy is far smaller than the British economy, this effect is negligible. If we do not include Northern Ireland in the calculation, exports fell not by 0.5% but by 0.8%.

As well as attenuating the rise in total exports, Brexit also had the effect of changing the ratio between re-exports and domestic exports. The ratio between re-exports and domestic exports in the 2015–2020 period was always around 48% for re-exports and 52% for domestic exports. In 2023, the ratio shifted to 40% re-exports, 60% domestic exports.

In 2023, imports from the UK fell more sharply than imports from all countries

Figure 2.4.7 shows that imports of goods from the UK to the Netherlands appear to have been less impacted by Brexit. The increase in value has more or less kept pace with the increase in the value of imports from all countries. There was a dip in 2020, the year of Brexit, with imports falling back to just below the level of 2015 (–‍3 percentage points). That dip was bigger than the dip in imports from all countries. However, imports of goods from the UK to the Netherlands subsequently grew rapidly. By 2022, they had doubled relative to 2015. In 2023, conversely, the value of goods imported from the UK was a quarter less than a year before. That year, imports from Northern Ireland fell slightly more, by 29%. Imports from all countries combined fell less sharply, by 9%.

The latest quarterly figures show that in the first quarter of 2024, the import value of goods from the UK decreased further. Compared to the fourth quarter of 2023, import value from the UK fell by 6% in the first quarter of 2024. Relative to the first quarter of 2023, it was 25% lower.

The fact that the peak in the growth of imports from the UK in 2022 and the fall in 2023 were greater than for all countries combined is probably explained by the scale of Dutch imports of mineral fuels, such as natural gas and crude oil, from the UK. See also Figure 2.4.8. Mineral fuels rose significantly in price after 2020, before falling sharply again in 2023. In 2023, the Netherlands imported €31.2bn in goods from the UK. Mineral fuels accounted for more than a third (37%) of that figure. In terms of value, that product category was followed by machinery and equipment (20%) and manufactured goods (17%).

Rise in imports of natural gas from the UK

In Figure 2.4.9, we look at the most important product groups in imports. In both 2015 and 2023, natural gas, crude oil and refined petroleum products were in the top 3, but in a different order. It is striking that the Netherlands significantly increased the value of its imports of natural gas from the UK over that period. That does not necessarily correspond to an increase in volume: natural gas has increased considerably in price in recent years. Nevertheless, in 2023, the Netherlands obtained 11% of its imported natural gas (gaseous and liquid) from the UK, whereas two years before, in 2021, the figure was 2% (CBS, 2024e). Imports of (mobile) telephones, routers and modems are now also higher than in 2015. A number of chemical products have dropped out of the top 15 as it stood in 2015: hydrocarbons and compounds with nitrogenous groups. By 2023, we were also sourcing products like office machines, tyres and inner tubes, shoes and products for photography and cinematography from different countries.

Imports and exports from a UK perspective

It is interesting to also look at this from the UK perspective. To what extent is the Netherlands an important trading partner for the British and has this changed in recent years? This may be ascertained from data from the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS, 2015; ONS, 2024).

In 2023, the Netherlands was the UK’s third biggest trading partner for exports, after the US and Germany. In 2015, the Netherlands ranked fourth. Of UK goods exported in 2023, 8% went to the Netherlands. In 2015, the figure was 6%.

In 2023, the Netherlands was the UK’s fourth biggest trading partner for its imports, after Germany, the US and China. The Netherlands also ranked fourth in 2015, before Brexit. Of the goods imported by the UK in 2023, 9% were from the Netherlands. In 2015, the figure was 8%.

Although it has repeatedly been shown that the UK’s trade with EU member states has fallen since Brexit (Smid & Frankena, 2021; Du et al., 2023) or in the run-up to Brexit (Douch & Edwards, 2022), these figures show that UK trade with the Netherlands did not fall further than that with other (EU) countries.

2.5 References



Arriola, C., Cai, M., Kowalski, P., Miroudot, S., & van Tongeren, F. (2024). OECD Trade Policy Paper. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Bohn, T., Notten, T., Ramaekers, P., & Wong, K.F. (2023). [Critical materials in the Dutch supply chain]. Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2023a, 27 October). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2023b, 7 September). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024a, 2 May). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024b, 5 June). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024c, 21 June). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024d, 5 July). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024e). . [Dataset]. Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 1-7-2024.

Clingendael (2023, 3 November). [A geopolitical compass for the Netherlands: a tilting world after all?] Clingendael Institute. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Comhan (2018). . ComHan Holland. Accessed on 8 June 2024.

De Maeseneer, W. (2024, 6 June). [Europe’s largest rare earths stockpile discovered in Norway]. VRT. Accessed on 8 June 2024.

Delbert, C. (2023, 26 December). . Popular Mechanics. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Douch, M., & Edwards, T. H. (2022). . Journal of Applied Econometrics, 37(2), 305–329.

Du, J., Satoglu, E. B., & Shepotylo, O. (2023). Contemporary Social Science, 18(2), 266–283.

Duintjer Tebbens, M. (2023, 3 October). [Solar panels sharply down in demand by homeowners]. Nieuwsuur. Accessed on 13 June 2024.

EEA (2024, 21 March). . State and Outlook 2024. EEA Report 13/2023. European Environment Agency.

European Commission (2023a). . European Commission. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

European Commission (2023b). . European Commission. Accessed on 27 June 2024.

European Commission (2022). . European Commission. Accessed on 4 July 2024.

FD (2023). [Enterprises move factories from China to Europe and the US]. Het Financieele Dagblad. Accessed on 27 June 2024.

FD (2024). . [ . Het Financieele Dagblad. Accessed on 4 July 2024.

Franssen, L., & Rooyakkers, J. (2021). ? (Summary in English) In S. Creemers, M. Jaarsma & J. Rooyakkers (Eds.), Internationalisation Monitor 2021, fourth quarter: Exogenous shocks. Statistics Netherlands.

Franssen, L., Lemmers, O., Prenen, L., & Wong, K. F. (2020). [UK more independent on EU than previously thought]. Economisch Statistische Berichten, 105(4786), 268–271.

Freeman, D., Meijerink, G., Teulings, R., van ’t Riet, M., Notten, T., Wong, K.F., Aerts, N., & Lemmers, O. (2022). . Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB)/Statistics Netherlands.

Grazia Attinasi, M., Ioannou, D., Lebastard, L., & Morris, R. (2023). . ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/2023. European Central Bank. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Grohol, M., & Veeh, M. (2023). European Commission.

Hijink, M., & van Pinxteren, G. (2022, 25 August). [Made in China becomes Made in China: How China is losing its status as a manufacturing hub]. NRC. Accessed on 27 June 2024.

Jongsma, M., & Lalkens, P. (2024, 3 January). . [China’s neighbouring countries are benefiting from ‘less from China’ strategy by Western firms]. Het Financieele Dagblad. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

De Maeseneer, W. (2024, 6 June). [Europe’s largest rare earths stockpile discovered in Norway]. VRT. Accessed on 8 June 2024.

Middeldorp, M. (2019, 9 August). [Which Asian countries could benefit from moving production out of China?] Rabobank Research. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Nieuwsuur (2024, 26 March). [China’s economy is stuck: Europe is fearing the consequences]. Nieuwsuur. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

ONS (2015). . Office for National Statistics.

ONS (2024). . Office for National Statistics.

Council of the EU (2024, 18 March). . Council of the European Union. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Government of the Netherlands (2022, 9 September). [Looking for a large sales market? Come to Indonesia]. Government of the Netherlands blog. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Government of the Netherlands (2023, 25 October). [What are critical raw materials? Foreign affairs clearly explained]. Government of the Netherlands blog. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Rystad Energy (2023, 20 July). . Rystad Energy. Accessed on 13 June 2024.

Schonebeek, K. (2024, 29 May). . [How coal mines can help with the green transition]. Change Inc. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

Smid, T., & Frankena, G. (2021, 7 September). [UK trade shifts to countries outside the EU]. Economisch Statistische Berichten. Accessed on 4 July 2024.

United Nations (2024, 1 March). . International Resource Panel of the United Nations. Accessed on 13 June 2024.

World Bank (2024). . World Bank. Accessed on 26 June 2024.





Noten

These figures relate to 27 trading partners: China, Hong Kong, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Macau, Mongolia, Taiwan (in East Asia), Brunei, Cambodia, Philippines, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, East Timor, Vietnam (in Southeast Asia), Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka (in South Asia).

2021–2023 has been chosen as the current period here because 2020 was an exceptional year due to the pandemic and may therefore not provide a good comparison with the subsequent years. Since 2021, geopolitical relations have been characterised by rising tensions (Clingendael, 2023).

This figure includes quasi-transit trade, the transit of goods in foreign ownership. Excluding this flow, import value still grew nearly four-fold, but its size was significantly less: €7.4bn in 2023. In 2022, the Netherlands was the EU’s largest importer of critical raw materials from non-EU countries. An important nuance here is that the overwhelming share, approximately 95% of import value, ultimately finds its way abroad again, either by means of direct transit trade or following the processing of the raw materials in the Netherlands (Bohn et al., 2023). This contrasts with the product side, where a larger share of the imports is intended for the Dutch market. For example, road vehicles (dependent on critical raw materials), in particular cars, are the most important Dutch import product in terms of direct consumption after import (CBS, 2024c).

Rare earth metals are a group of special metals used in many high-tech applications such as smartphones, wind turbines, MRI scanners, hard disk drives, LEDs and electric motors (European Commission, 2023b). Dysprosium, erbium, europium, gadolinium, holmium, lutetium, terbium, thulium, ytterbium and yttrium are heavy earth metals. Cerium, lanthanum, neodymium, praseodymium and samarium are light earth metals (Grohol & Veeh, 2023).

In 2023, the main elements involved were magnesium, manganese, tungsten and cobalt. In the first quarter of 2024, China’s lead over Germany as the biggest supplier of products containing critical raw materials was substantially reduced (to a minimal level). This was partly due to a significant fall in the import value of Chinese solar panels. That in turn was linked to lower prices, bigger (strategic) reserves in Europe (Rystad, 2023) and falling demand (Duintjer Tebbens, 2023). There has also been a reduction in the value of imports of telephones and laptops/tablets from China, which is also connected to lower import prices.International trade in goods

Authors: Sarah Creemers, Bas Kerckhoffs, Janneke Rooyakkers

This chapter focuses on the international trade in goods. What did the Dutch goods trade look like in 2023? How did it develop in terms of value, price and volume compared to a year before? Which products were imported or exported more than a year before, and which were imported or exported less? What were the most important countries of origin and destination for Dutch trade in goods? How important was the Netherlands to the goods trade of other countries worldwide? How did the Dutch market share in global trade develop? In this chapter, we answer these and many other questions by analysing the composition and the geographical dimension of Dutch goods imports and exports.

3.1 Key findings

Dutch goods exports in 2023

Dutch goods exports declined by 5.9% in 2023, to a total of €686.6bn. Re-exports fell by 6.7%, slightly more than the 5.1% drop in domestic exports.

This decline in export value was due to a drop in both volume and price, with the price decrease (–‍3.2%) playing a larger role than the volume decrease (–‍2.7%).

Notably, the lower price of mineral fuels and chemical products, along with the decline in the volume of mineral fuels, contributed to the absolute decrease in the value of goods exported in 2023.

Europe remained the primary export destination, as in previous years, with 77% of Dutch export value going to European countries. Germany, Belgium and France were again the Netherlands’ most important markets for Dutch goods within Europe in 2023.

Machines and equipment were the most exported items (by value) in 2023, followed by manufactured goods and mineral fuels.

Of total Dutch exports, 54 percent went to the Netherlands’ five main trading partners: Germany, Belgium, France, the UK and the US. Germany imported the most goods by far in all product categories.

There are clear differences in re-exports and domestic exports in the different categories. Transportation equipment, with a share of over 70%, comprised a large share of Dutch domestic exports. Raw materials and natural products – a category that includes goods such as flowers and plants – and food and beverages also include many Dutch domestic exports. In the categories of manufactured goods and machinery and equipment, by contrast, re-exports were more common.

The closer the destination country is to the Netherlands, the more re-exports there are. Neighbouring countries such as Germany (60 percent) and Belgium (55 percent) received more re-exports than other major trading partners such as the US (30 percent) and China (20 percent).

Refined petroleum products, other machinery and telephones were the Netherlands’ top three exports. Mineral fuels (crude oil, petroleum-based products and natural gas) and chemicals (medicines, pharmaceuticals and chemicals) fell sharply in price in 2023. Machinery, by contrast, saw a sharp price increase in 2023. Export volumes of petroleum products, other machinery, telephones and natural gas declined, while exports of medicines, medical products and laptops and tablets increased.

Dutch goods imports in 2023

Dutch goods imports fell by 8.9% to a total of €614.9bn in 2023, a steeper decline than goods exports.

The decrease in import value was due to a 5.5% price decline and a 3.4% drop in volume.

The lower price of imported mineral fuels and chemical products was largely responsible for the decline in import value, along with the volume decline in imported manufactured goods and mineral fuels.

The most important import categories by value were manufactured goods and machines and equipment. Mineral fuels dropped to the third most significant import category.

Around 59 percent of all imported goods came from other European countries. As last year, the US increased in importance in terms of Dutch imports. This increase can be attributed specifically to a rise in natural gas imports.

Germany, the US and Belgium were the primary countries of origin by import value. Imports from Russia – a country from which the Netherlands had been importing a large amount of mineral fuels before the outbreak of war in Ukraine – fell by 76 percent. The value of imports from China also dropped sharply in 2023. This was mainly due to lower imports of phones and laptops and computers.

Crude oil, natural gas and refined petroleum products are the main imports. All three of these saw a significant fall in prices; only crude oil saw an increase in volume. The Netherlands also imported fewer phones, laptops and tablets by volume in 2023. Imports of medicines, automobiles and pharmaceutical products increased.

Importance of the Netherlands in world exports and imports

The international figures are based on the CHELEM International Trade database of the Centre d'Etudes Prospectives et d'Informations Internationales (CEPII) in France. The most recently available figures on this date from 2022.

In 2022, the Netherlands accounted for 2.9% of global exports. In terms of global goods exports, the Netherlands ranked sixth after China, the US, Germany, Japan and South Korea. China exported the most goods of any country in the world, with a share of exports of 15.7% in 2022.

Of all goods imported into Belgium in 2022, nearly 19% (by value) came from the Netherlands, making it the top country of origin for Belgian goods imports. For Sweden and Germany, the Netherlands was the second most important supplier.

Globally, the Netherlands ranked sixth as a goods importer in 2022, following the US, China, Germany, Japan and France. The Netherlands contributed 3.3% to global goods imports in 2022. The US remained the largest importer with a share of total goods imports of 13.1% by trade value.

How important is the Netherlands as a trading partner for other economies?

The Netherlands increased its share of Austrian and Taiwanese goods imports in 2022 compared to the previous year. However, the Dutch share of German, UK and Czech goods imports decreased.

The Netherlands is also a significant destination for goods exported from various countries. In 2022, 27% of all goods exported from Iceland were destined for the Netherlands, making it Iceland’s primary export destination. Similarly, the Netherlands ranked first for goods exports from Cameroon, and was the third for Belgium in 2022.

The Dutch share in Norwegian goods exports decreased in 2022. However, the Netherlands increased its share in goods exports from Hong Kong in 2022. The Dutch market share of Russia’s export value was 4.5 percentage points lower in 2022 compared to 2021, before the war broke out in Ukraine.

Outline

This chapter considers both the composition and geographical dimension of the Dutch goods trade. In sections 3.2 through to 3.4 we consider that trade from a Dutch perspective. In section 3.2, we describe the key developments in the Dutch goods trade and changes in volume and price. We discuss Dutch exports of goods in more detail in section 3.3. What is the composition of Dutch exports? How important are other countries for Dutch goods exports? Section 3.4 provides details of Dutch goods imports. In sections 3.5 and 3.6, the roles are reversed and we look at the significance of the Netherlands as a supplier and buyer of goods from the perspective of the rest of the world, based on international data.

3.2 Key developments in Dutch goods trade in 2023

Value of goods exports in 2023 lower than in 2022

2023 was an exceptional year in several respects. In terms of trade, tensions between the US and China rose, the war in Ukraine dragged on and conflicts in the Middle East flared up still further. At the same time, production chains stabilised and the international goods trade cooled off following the COVID-19 pandemic (UNCTAD, 2024). The balance between global supply and demand for goods improved, helping to level out the peaks in inflation seen in 2022.

Figure 3.2.1 shows the import and export value of the Dutch goods trade over recent years. In 2023, the Netherlands exported €686.6bn worth of goods abroad. That was 5.9% less than in 2022, when trading values were at extremely high levels, in part due to the spike in inflation. In 2023, the Netherlands imported €614.9bn worth of goods. Import value also fell compared to 2022, by 8.9%.

Alongside changes in total import and export values, Figure 3.2.1 also shows the breakdown of exports by domestic exports and re-exports. In the case of re-exports, the products do come into the ownership of a firm or person based in the Netherlands, but no substantial processing takes place before they are exported again. Per euro of export value, earnings from domestic exports are higher than from re-exports. Chapter 6 of this publication looks at export earnings in more detail. With a reduction of 6.7% compared to 2022, re-exports fell more markedly than domestic exports (–‍5.1%) in 2023.

Price and volume changes in goods trade

The goods trade which is discussed in this chapter is traditionally only expressed in euros: the value of the trade in the prices of that moment. Those current prices therefore conceal changes in the volume of trade. In particular due to price falls in 2020 and significant price rises in 2021 and 2022 compared to a year before, an analysis focused purely on changes in the value of trade would be too one-sided. In this chapter, we therefore show, for the first time, the price and volume changes in Dutch trade in detail for 2023, alongside the changes in the value of trade which are discussed extensively.

Price developments in international trade are important not only to obtain a comprehensive picture of trade: they also play a key role in domestic inflation. In a small and open economy like the Netherlands, domestic consumer and producer prices are partly determined by price developments elsewhere. For example, Bonam (2024) sees a relationship between price rises and the share of imported intermediate goods. An important factor in this are energy prices (oil and gas), which fluctuate considerably. Oil and gas are not only used directly by consumers as fuel for cars and home heating, they are also used by firms in their production processes, which means those prices are then passed onto consumers in the prices of the end products. As such, mineral fuels have a major impact on price developments of goods and services.

Price developments in international trade at CBS

CBS uses two statistical concepts when measuring Dutch international trade. The International Trade in Goods Statistics (ITGS) – on which this chapter is largely based – takes border crossings as their starting point. The CBS National Accounts are based on the transfer of ownership of goods between a resident and a non-resident. These import and export figures based on the ownership principle presented in real terms, that is to say they are corrected for price rises. This sheds light on the volume development of total Dutch goods trade (CBS, 2024a). However, this does not take place at country and product level. For this reason, new price and volume figures have been developed based on the concept of border crossing, which are used for the first time in this chapter. The method is still in development, which means that the figures shown here are provisional.

Fall in international trade prices in 2023 after two years of price rises

As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, falling demand, disagreements between oil-producing countries and economic uncertainty, the prices of many goods fell in 2020. In particular, the price of oil and petroleum products fell sharply. This in turn had an impact on the prices of other goods. From late 2020, and especially in 2021 and 2022, the demand for goods picked up again. At the same time, manufacturers were hit by logistical problems and later by other disruptions to international trade, such as the war in Ukraine, lockdowns in China and the trade war between the US and China. Because in many cases supply was unable to meet demand, prices rose significantly in 2021 and 2022. In 2023, the situation normalised somewhat, resulting in prices fell somewhat compared to a year before.

Figure 3.2.2 shows the development of value, price and volume of goods imports and exports over recent years. Imports and exports developed in a similar way. Value and price growth in 2021 and 2022 were strikingly higher than in other years. In the other years, the developments were negative. The falls in prices in 2020 and 2023 are linked in part to sharp falls in the price of oil compared to the year before. Although value growth in 2022 was huge, it was largely accounted for by increased prices; the volume of trade actually decreased.

In 2023, that trend of falling trade volumes continued, which, combined with price falls, produced the reduction in the value of the international goods trade. After two years of unprecedented growth in trade value, the value of Dutch trade fell in 2023. The global trade in goods also declined, with China being an exception (CPB 2024). The value of Dutch goods exports was 5.9% lower in 2023 than in 2022. At the same time, weighted export prices were 3.2% lower on average than a year before. The decline in export value may therefore be partly explained by lower prices, but also by a volume reduction of around 2.7%. The reduction in import value was greater. In 2023, the import value of goods fell by 8.9%. The fall in prices of imported goods – 5.5% on average – played an important role in this. Import volume contracted by 3.4%.

In Figure 3.2.3, we further break down the volume development of goods imports and exports for 2023 compared to 2022 by product type. Although the average weighted volume development of trade in 2023 was negative – which is to say that the trade volumes of imports and exports were lower on average than a year before – that was not true for all goods. As may be seen in the figure, mineral fuels, (imports of) manufactured goods, food and beverages and raw materials and natural products in particular saw (large) falls in volume. Natural products also include, amongst others, oilseeds, wood and natural oils and fats. The traded volumes of transport equipment, chemical products (exports) and machinery (exports) did increase compared to a year before.

In sections 3.3 and 3.4, which look at goods exports and imports in detail, we show the price and volume development of the most important products (specified in more detail), allowing us to better interpret the overall change in value.

Europe the most important market for Dutch exports

In 2023, Europe was once again by far the largest market for Dutch exports. Figure 3.2.4 shows that in 2023, 77.3% (€530bn) of total export value went to other European countries, which is similar to the share in 2022. In absolute terms, exports to the different continents fell, except for the ‘other’ region. Thanks to the free internal market, much of Europe is easy for the Netherlands to sell products to. As such, the European export market also receives a relatively large amount of re-exports from the Netherlands: 56% of total exports in 2023. Domestic exports are significantly higher to every other region, with a share of around 70%.

Imports more geographically diversified than exports

The Netherlands is also highly dependent on European countries for its imports of goods (see Figure 3.2.5). But with a share of over 59% of all goods imports, Europe plays a significantly smaller role than in exports (78%). That share has fallen since 2021 – when it was 64% – while the Americas region, by contrast, has become more important as a supplier over the years. Whereas in 2021, only 11.5% of all the import value of goods came from the Americas, by 2023 that had increased to nearly 15%. With the outbreak of the war in Ukraine and the decision by the EU to scale back imports of Russian energy products in order to reduce its dependence on Russia, there was a need to identify alternative energy suppliers. The Americas, and the US in particular, proved a useful substitute as a region of origin. For instance, imports of liquid natural gas (LNG) from the US grew spectacularly: in 2020 there were no imports of LNG, while by 2023 it was the second-largest import product from that country, with a value of €11bn. As a result, the Americas was the only region that saw an absolute rise in import value in 2023 compared to 2022. The share of imported products from the Americas rose, while the share of the other regions declined somewhat in 2023.

3.3 Dutch goods exports in detail

Reduction in export value of mineral fuels largely due to fall in price

Dutch goods exports were worth €686.6bn in 2023, 5.9% less than in 2022. Figure 3.3.1 shows that the most important factor in this fall is related to mineral fuels. The export value of this product category fell by 25% in 2023 to around €121bn, with lower prices explaining –‍17% and a reduction in volume of –‍8%.

Mineral fuels were no longer the most important product category in Dutch exports in 2023. Machinery and equipment, which had always been the most important product category before 2022, moved back into first place. In 2023, machinery and equipment worth €157bn were exported. Exports of machinery and equipment were higher than in 2022 in terms of value, as were exports in the food and beverages and transport equipment product categories. Important countries of destination for machinery and equipment included Germany, France, the US and South Korea. A notable climber was China. In 2022, the Netherlands exported €5.4bn worth of machinery and equipment to China; in 2023, that rose by 84% to €9.9bn. A substantial part of the increase was accounted for by higher prices of exports in this goods category.

The food and beverages product category is a relatively important export category for the Netherlands: with a share of 63% of domestic goods exports, the Netherlands’ earnings from this product category are relatively high. Neighbouring countries such as Germany, Belgium and France are important markets for these products, with Germany being by far the most important destination, accounting for 24% of the total.

Most important trading partners saw fall in export value and share in 2023

Germany, Belgium, France and the UK are the four most important destinations for Dutch exports. However, export values to those countries decreased in 2023. Figure 3.3.2 shows Dutch export value to the most important destinations. Partly due to the fall in export value of mineral fuels, large volumes of which are exported to our neighbouring countries, the share of our two most important export partners, Germany and Belgium, declined.

The UK, the fourth most important export partner in 2023, saw a relatively modest fall of 0.5% relative to 2022. Export value to the US grew slightly by €327 million. An increase in exports of machinery and equipment to the US, from €9.7bn in 2022 to €11.7bn in 2023, was largely responsible for this. The products in question were primarily specialised machines and laptops and tablets.

For two other important export partners, there were also increases in export value. Substantially more exports went to China, the ninth-largest export partner, in 2023 than in 2022. Total export value to that country increased by €3.4bn to €18.1bn. Again, a sharp increase in exports of machinery and equipment – in particular chip-making equipment – was responsible for the rise. South Korea, which occupies eleventh place in the list of export partners, also received more goods from the Netherlands. This was again due to increased exports of machinery and equipment, which rose by €951 million (+15%). The value of exports to Taiwan, by contrast, fell significantly compared to 2022 – by 29% to €8.0bn in 2023. Last year, Taiwan received substantially less machinery and equipment from the Netherlands in terms of value.

Figure 3.3.3 shows changes in export value and export volume in 2023 for the the Netherlands’ main partners. They vary considerably from one country to the next. This is mainly due to the types of products that are traded with each country. Due to specialisation and/or the presence of raw materials and auxiliary materials, the trade portfolio with every country is different, as is reflected in the value and price development per country. For example, we export a lot of refined petroleum products such as petrol, diesel and kerosene to neighbouring countries. Due to reductions in export volume and, in particular, the price of fuels, the export value of these products has fallen significantly.

The overall reduction in the volume of exports is clearly visible in exports to our main trading partners, because we export many different products to those partners and, as such, they are a good reflection of the Dutch export portfolio. The value of exports to Germany, Belgium and France all fell. In the case of Germany, this was primarily due to reduced trade volumes (in telephones as well as mineral fuels). The value of exports to Belgium and France fell mainly due to lower prices. Alongside mineral fuels, this lower export value is explained by the fall in prices of many chemical products, including medicines.

The only country in the top 10 for which export value increased (substantially) was China. This was primarily due to volume growth in exports of specialised (chip-making) machines, and the higher prices paid for these.

Top 5 trading partners most important for mineral fuels

More than half (53.7%) of Dutch goods exports went to the five biggest export partners: Germany, Belgium, France, the UK and the US. Two thirds of all mineral fuels exported by the Netherlands went to these countries: the highest share of all the product categories. At 33%, Germany remained the most dominant destination for mineral fuels, even if its share compared to 2022 did fall by 3 percentage points. Otherwise, only the German share in Dutch exports of food and beverages fell compared to 2022. At 43%, exports of machinery and equipment was least concentrated on our five biggest export partners; a relatively large proportion of goods in that product category also went to China, South Korea and Taiwan.

Slightly lower re-exports in 2023 compared to 2022

With major international transport nodes such as the port of Rotterdam and Schiphol, the Netherlands plays a key role in re-exports. There are major differences between different product categories in the relative shares of re-exports and domestic exports. Figure 3.3.5 reveals that only 38% of exports of manufactured goods are domestic exports. Products that fall under manufactured goods include medical instruments, clothing and instruments for measurement and analysis. On the other hand, more than 70% of all exports of transport equipment were domestic exports. The bulk of these were ships, trucks and parts for passenger cars.

At 59% and 62% respectively, machinery and equipment and manufactured goods accounted for a large proportion of re-exports, as has traditionally been the case. Typical products are computers, telephones and laptops, clothing and various consumer articles. These products are imported from countries such as China and the US, come into the ownership of a Dutch firm and are then exported again without any significant processing having taken place.

At first sight, the relatively high share of domestic exports in mineral fuels is remarkable. The Netherlands barely produces any crude oil, and natural gas production has also fallen significantly. However, the Netherlands does process crude oil into fuels like petrol and diesel on a large scale. The Dutch firm in question then exports those products to other countries such as Germany and Belgium, which means they count as domestic exports.

High levels of re-exports to neighbouring and EU countries

Figure 3.3.6 shows the distribution between re-exports and domestic exports for Dutch exports to the 15 biggest trading partners. Countries like Germany, France and Belgium have relatively high proportions of re-exports, at 60%, 63% and 55%, respectively. At 30%, 20% and 11%, respectively, countries like the US, China and South Korea receive relatively few re-exports. The further away the country of destination lies from the Netherlands, the less logical it is that the Netherlands would function as a trade hub for that country. Moreover, EU countries have an internal market, which means that trade via the Netherlands does not generate any additional costs in the form of clearance or tariff costs at customs for other EU countries.

The UK has become less important as a destination for re-exports. In the 2015–2020 period, the ratio between re-exports and domestic exports was always around 48% re-exports, 52% domestic exports. On 31 January 2020, the UK left the EU and, nearly a year later, it also left the European internal market. As a result, the ratio had shifted to 40% re-exports, 60% domestic exports in 2023. This was due to the fact that the Trade and Cooperation Agreement, or TCA, resulted in a substantial increase in trade costs between the UK and the EU (Freeman et al., 2022). Whereas before Brexit, trade crossed borders unimpeded, goods now have to be cleared by customs. Without an internal market, re-exporting products is less attractive, which probably accounts for the fall in re-exports. See also Creemers et al., 2022. It should be noted that this does not apply to Northern Ireland. This is because that territory was accorded a special status within the UK, which means it is still part of the internal market; Northern Ireland actually has a relatively high level of re-exports.

Sharp fall in exported value of natural gas

Even if we use a more detailed product classification , with a value of over €66bn, refined oil products remain the biggest export product. See also Figure 3.3.7. This represents a decline in comparison with 2022, when the exported value was nearly €80bn. Figure 3.3.7 shows the 15 most important goods exported by the Netherlands in 2023. Another important product in Dutch exports, which also falls under the mineral fuels category, is natural gas. The export value of natural gas also fell sharply, more so than that of petroleum products. Whereas €44.8bn worth of natural gas was exported in 2022, in 2023 the value fell by 47% to €23.5bn.

Also note that other machines are part of the larger category machinery and equipment. Whereas there was still a relatively high level of re-exports for the overall category (59%), for other machines (generally high-value, specialised machines), at 6% re-exports, that was barely the case. The vast majority are manufactured in the Netherlands and then exported; for example, advanced machines for the chip-making industry. The most important countries of destination for those machines were China, South Korea, Taiwan and the US.

The development in export value of the top 10 most important goods is again shown in Figure 3.3.8. Supplementary to Figure 3.3.7, this figure also shows the price and volume development of those goods. The price and volume of mineral fuels exported by the Netherlands – for instance, petroleum products, natural gas, crude oil and petroleum residues – fell substantially compared to 2022. The price of natural gas in particular fell significantly. This was due to a combination of large (imported) stocks, a mild winter and weak demand from the manufacturing sector (De Boer, 2024). The falling price of fossil fuels was largely responsible for the overall lower price of exports in 2023 that we saw in the preceding sections: both directly and indirectly through lower costs in the production processes of other goods. Partly as a result of that, products of the chemicals and pharmaceutical industry, which are largely dependent on mineral fuels (CLO, 2023), were also substantially cheaper in 2023 than in 2022.

The overall fall in volume was also largely caused by mineral fuels. Exports of other machines also contributed to this, with a significantly greater increase in price than value in 2023. Other machines, generally high-value specialised machines, have been increasing in price for a number of years due to further digitalisation and the automation of industry and society.

Finally, the prices of laptops, telephones and tablets exported from the Netherlands also fell slightly. This trend has also been ongoing for a number of years: ever better – and more expensive – models keep appearing on the market, as a result of which the existing models quickly become cheaper (Jongsma, 2024). As such, the average price fall and volume rise together produced an increase in value in 2023.

3.4 Dutch goods imports in detail

Machinery and equipment once again most important product category

Goods imports totalled just under €615bn in 2023. This means that imports, too, fell compared to 2022 (–‍8.9%). Figure 3.4.1 shows that, as with exports, mineral fuels were no longer the most important product category for imports. Mineral fuels had an import value of €133bn in 2023, around 22% less than in 2022. The most important product category in 2023, machinery and equipment, saw a slight fall in imports of around 2% compared to 2022, to €138.3bn. Imports of food and beverages did increase in 2023, by 4.4% to €59.2bn, and the import value of transport equipment also grew.

Shift in imports of mineral fuels continues

For imports, too, Germany was the Netherlands’ most important trading partner (see Figure 3.4.2). In absolute terms, the import volume from Germany remained virtually constant between 2022 and 2023, at around €103.3bn. In view of the overall reduction in import value, this means that Germany’s share in total imports grew, from 15.3% in 2022 to 16.8% in 2023. The share of imports from Belgium, our second most important trading partner, also remained the same, although their absolute value fell.

Imports from the US saw a substantial increase, both in share and in absolute value. Goods worth €64bn were imported from the US in 2023. Whereas the US share was always around 7.5% between 2015 and 2021, it rose to 8.4% in 2022 and to as high as 10.4% in 2023. That sharp increase in imports was the result of the rise in import value of mineral fuels, in particular crude oil and LNG. In 2021, around €8bn of mineral fuels were imported; by 2023, this had increased to nearly €26bn.

Import value from Russia falls by three-quarters between 2022 and 2023

While the total import value from Russia still increased in 2022 compared to a year before due to the high prices of energy products, in 2023, a sharp fall was recorded. The sanctions imposed by the EU from March 2022 thus had their effect on imports (European Council, 2024). In 2023, import value from Russia fell by a full 75.6% to €5.3bn. As a result, Russia also slipped outside the Netherlands’ top 20 biggest trading partners for imports. In 2021, Russia had been our sixth-largest supplier of goods.

Finally, there was also a significant shift with regard to one of the Netherlands’ main trading partners, China. Whereas China’s import share had increased in virtually every year between 2015 and 2022, that share fell significantly in 2023. China’s share as a country of origin for Dutch imports fell by 1.1 percentage points, to 8.4%, which equals a reduction of €12.8bn. That fall was primarily the result of lower imports of telephones and laptops and computers (CBS, 2023b).

In Figure 3.4.3, we also show changes in import volume and import value relative to 2022. The falls in the volume and value of imports from the UK and Norway stand out, which we can explain mainly with reference to mineral fuels. The rise in import volumes from Germany and the US is largely attributable to cars, other machines and medicines for Germany, and to mineral fuels, medical devices and consumer electronics such as telephones and laptops for the US. The sharp increase in import value and volume from Ireland is a result of increased imports of medicines and pharmaceutical products.

Dutch imports more concentrated than exports

Of all Dutch imports, just under half came from the five biggest trading partners, i.e. Germany, the US, Belgium, China and the UK (see Figure 3.4.4). The rest, 51%, came from the rest of the world. This means that imports, at 49%, were slightly more concentrated among the five biggest trading partners than exports, with around 46% of all export value attributable to the five biggest trading partners.

Total import value from China fell in 2023. That reduction was seen across all product categories, with machinery and equipment (–‍44% import value) and manufactured products (–‍25%) seeing the largest falls. Although China’s share in transport equipment dropped by nearly 14% in 2023, the import value of Chinese passenger cars did increase substantially, by 372% (CBS, 2024c). With that growth, China accounted for nearly 3% of Dutch import value of cars in 2023.

Crude oil remains the most important import product despite fall

Despite the significant falls in the import value of mineral fuels in 2023, the top-three import products continued to consist of goods in this product category (see Figure 3.4.5). The import value of crude oil, natural gas and refined oil products fell by 11%, 32% and 20%, respectively.

The most important products showing rises were medicines, with 15%, followed by passenger cars, with 26%. In 2023, there were shortages of various medicines (KNMP, 2024). As in 2022, the Netherlands imported more medicines, medicaments and pharmaceutical products from Germany than from any other country. The import value from that country rose by 17% in 2023, and substantially more medicines also came from Belgium, with a growth of 53%. As a result, Belgium took over second place from the US, which saw a fall of 4% compared to 2022. India, an important supplier of generic drugs, posted an increase of 21% in 2023, making it our eleventh-largest trading partner for imports of these goods.

Changes in the value, volume and price of Dutch imports in 2023 are comparable to those for exports (see Figure 3.4.6 for the top 10). Imports of mineral fuels, such as crude oil, natural gas, petroleum products and energy-intensive goods such as chemical products and medicines, fell sharply in price due to lower oil and natural gas prices worldwide. Import volumes grew significantly for pharmaceutical products and medicines in 2023, as they did for medical instruments.

The import value of cars also increased significantly in 2023. Due to increased costs for producers and the strong position of car manufacturers – due to high demand following a number of bad years in the aftermath of the pandemic – new cars were more expensive in 2023 than in 2022 (Luman, 2024). Higher prices explain part of the rise in import value, but import volume also increased sharply in 2023.

3.5 The importance of the Netherlands as a supplier of goods to other countries

In this section, we set out what share the Netherlands has in the goods imports of other countries. In addition to the importance of the Netherlands’ role and its share of imports abroad, we also look at its position in the list of key partners for other economies.

CEPII-CHELEM data

We base the results in sections 3.5 and 3.6 on the CHELEM International Trade database of the French Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales (CEPII), with the most recent year available being 2022. We use CEPII-CHELEM because of the long time series of fully harmonised and complete bilateral trade data that is available. By harmonisation we mean that the international trade has been fully ‘squared’: imports of product 1 by country X from country Y are exactly the same as exports of product 1 by country Y to country X. That may seem obvious, but it is rarely the case in bilateral statistics. The main source of the CEPII-CHELEM database is UN Comtrade, supplemented by data from international institutes such as the IMF, the World Bank, the OECD and UNCTAD and all kinds of national sources such as statistical offices. In principle, reporting is for trade without re-exports, but for some countries including the Netherlands, re-exports are included in the figures. See also Aerts et al. (2022) for more information.

The Netherlands was the world’s sixth-largest goods exporter in 2022

Figure 3.5.1 shows that the Netherlands was responsible for 2.9% of global exports in 2022. The Netherlands ranked sixth among the largest exporters of goods worldwide, after China, the US, Germany, Japan and South Korea. The Netherlands has managed to maintain a position among the biggest goods exporters worldwide, ranking between sixth and tenth since 1970. The contributions of neighbouring countries such as France (2.6%), Belgium and the UK (both 2.0%) to global exports are smaller than those of the Netherlands. The biggest increase we see in Figure 3.5.1 is for China. In 2022, China was responsible for 15.7% of global exports; in 1970, the figure was barely 0.6%. China has been the world’s leading exporter since 2005; however, we are seeing some slowing of the Chinese advance (Lucas, 2023).

10% of Swedish goods imports from the Netherlands

In 2022, the Netherlands was among the five most important goods suppliers for all the countries in Figure 3.5.2 – in terms of value. With a share of 18.5%, our country was the most important supplier of goods for Belgium in 2022. Mineral fuels dominated Belgian imports from the Netherlands, followed by chemical products, such as medicines and plastics, and manufactured goods such as medical instruments. See also CBS (2024d) for more details about the Belgian economy and the trade relationship between the Netherlands and Belgium. A tenth of Swedish goods imports came from the Netherlands in 2022. This made us Sweden’s second-largest trading partner after Germany; in 2015, the Netherlands was in third place. In 2022, the Netherlands supplied significantly more refined oil products and mobile telephones, modems and routers to Sweden than in 2015.

In 2022, Germany obtained 8.8% of all its goods imports from the Netherlands. The most important goods were mineral fuels, telephones, medicines, chemical products, flowers and plants, fruit and vegetables. In 2015, the share was higher, at 9.6%. In 2015, the Netherlands was Germany’s most important supplier, whereas in 2022 it was China. Germany imports a lot of raw materials from China, but also semiconductors and batteries (DNHK, 2022; Pohu, 2022).

EU share in UK imports in freefall

The UK’s departure from the EU internal market and the customs union in early 2021 caused a shock to trade between the UK and the EU, as we noted previously in relation to Dutch trade with the UK in Chapter 2 of this publication and the preceding sections of this chapter. Figure 3.5.3 shows changes in the scale of imports from the the UK’s ten most important trade partners in 2015. The importance of EU countries in total UK imports diminished under the influence of the UK’s departure from the EU: from 52% in 2015 to 43% in 2022. The Dutch share in UK goods imports shrank from 7% in 2015 to 5% in 2022. We see the biggest contraction in UK imports of goods from Germany. In 2015, Germany was the most important supplier of goods to the UK, with a share of 15%. By 2022, that share had fallen by 5 percentage points. Non-EU countries such as Norway, China and the US increased in importance in terms of UK imports.

Netherlands increases its share in Austrian goods imports

Table 3.5.4 only lists the trading partners that imported at least $1bn worth of goods from the Netherlands in 2022, but for which the Dutch share was less than 5%. This table is therefore supplementary to the trading partners shown in Figure 3.5.2. With a share of around 4%, the Netherlands occupies a relatively important position as a supplier of goods for Austria. In 2015, the Dutch share in Austrian goods imports was 1.0 percentage point smaller. Austria has grown in importance for Dutch exports of commodities including medicines and aluminium. In 2022, the Netherlands exported nearly 7% of its aluminium to Austria.

Taiwan imports a relatively large amount of goods from the Netherlands. In 2022, the Netherlands primarily supplied machines, including machines for the chip-making industry, to Taiwanese importers. In 2022, Taiwan was the main buyer of those machines, with a share of approximately 37%. In 2022, the Dutch market share in Taiwan’s imports was nearly 3 percentage points higher than in 2015.

Czechia obtained nearly 5% of all its imported goods from our country in 2015. By 2022, that had fallen to a share of nearly 4%. In particular, Czechia imported fewer machine parts and medicines from the Netherlands compared to 2015. In 2015, Czechia was the most important buyer of machine parts for our country, but by 2022 it had fallen back to ninth place. Rademakers et al. (2024) note a fall in Dutch exports of products including electrical devices to countries such as Poland, Czechia and Hungary. This reduction in exports to Western allies be may partly explained by the sanctions imposed following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which prohibit those countries from acting as transit channels to Russia.

Source: CEPII

1) Only trading partners with a share of less than 5% from the Netherlands and which imported goods with a value of 1 billion US dollars or more from the Netherlands in 2022.

3.6 Importance of the Netherlands as a market for goods from other countries

In this section, we set out what share the Netherlands has in the goods exports of other countries. Alongside the Dutch share in the exports of other economies in terms of trade value, we also look at the Netherlands’ position on the list of the most important destinations for other economies.

Netherlands climbs to sixth position on the list of the world’s largest goods importers

Figure 3.6.1 shows that the Netherlands accounted for 3.3% of global imports in terms of value in 2022. In 2022, the Netherlands ranked sixth among importers worldwide, after the US, China, Germany, Japan and France. The previous year, our country had been in eighth place, after Hong Kong and the UK. In 2022, the Netherlands was the third-biggest European import country. The US was again the largest importing country in the world, with a 13.1% share of total global imports in 2022. China was second, with a share of 9.1%.

Netherlands the most important market for exports from Iceland and Cameroon

In 2022, the Netherlands was among the five most important markets for goods for all the trading partners shown in Figure 3.6.2. Indeed, for Iceland and Cameroon, the Netherlands was the biggest buyer of goods in 2022. Some 27% of all Icelandic exports went to the Netherlands in 2022, primarily aluminium. The equivalent figure for Cameroonian exports was 19% (mainly crude oil, natural gas and cocoa).

For our neighbour Belgium, the Netherlands was the third-largest market for goods in 2022, with a 14% share. Belgium exported a higher value of goods to Germany and France. The package of Belgian exports destined for the Netherlands is very diverse – from refined oil products to medicines and passenger cars. In 2022, the UK exported 9% of its goods to the Netherlands. This made the Netherlands the U.K.’s second most important customer after the US. In 2022, 7% of Germany’s total goods exports went to the Netherlands. From a German perspective, the Netherlands was the fourth most important export partner; the US, France and China were the most important customers for goods exports from our eastern neighbours. In 2022, Germany was the biggest supplier of cars and car parts, medicines and machines and machine parts for our country.

In 2022, Ivory Coast sent around 8% of its goods exports to the Netherlands, primarily cocoa – making the Netherlands Ivory Coast’s second-largest customer, after Switzerland. In 2015, our country had been in first place. In 2022, the Netherlands imported significantly fewer petroleum products from Ivory Coast than in 2015. Ivory Coast did remain our most important supplier of cocoa in 2022.

Nearly 6% of Hong Kong’s exports destined for the Netherlands

Table 3.6.3 lists only the trading partners that exported goods worth at least US$1bn to the Netherlands in 2022, but for which the Dutch share was less than 6%. This table is therefore supplementary to the trading partners shown in Figure 3.6.2. In 2022, the Netherlands received approximately 6% of Hong Kong’s goods exports, primarily advanced electronic products: mobile telephones, modems, routers; computers, laptops, tablets; microchips and semiconductor components. After China, Hong Kong was our second-largest supplier of microchips and semiconductor components in 2022. In 2022, the Dutch market share in Hong Kong’s exports was around 2.0 percentage points higher than in 2015. From Hong Kong’s perspective, China, India and then the Netherlands were the most important markets for its goods in 2022.

The Netherlands’ share in Norwegian goods exports shrank from 10% in 2015 to nearly 6% in 2022. Norwegian exports destined for the Netherlands consist primarily of mineral fuels.

The Netherlands less significant as a market for Russian goods in 2022 than before the war

In 2022, the Netherlands received approximately 4% of Russia’s goods exports, mainly mineral fuels. In 2021, before the outbreak of the war with Ukraine, the Dutch market share in Russia’s exports was nearly 5 percentage points higher than in 2022. In 2022, China and India were Russia’s biggest markets, with shares of 21% and 8%, respectively. In 2022, the Netherlands slipped back to sixth place as a Russian export partner, whereas our country had been second in 2021. The EU has imposed trade sanctions on Russia in response to the war against Ukraine. A little over a month after the start of the war and the first sanctions coming into effect, Dutch import value from Russia started to fall (Creemers et al., 2023).

Source: CEPII

1) Only trading partners with a share of less than 6% from the Netherlands and which exported goods with a value of 1 billion US dollars or more to the Netherlands in 2022.

The Netherlands is a relatively important market for goods from Kenya and Uruguay

Of the countries with an export flow to the Netherlands of less than $1bn, Kenya and Uruguay export a relatively large share of their exports to the Netherlands (see Figure 3.6.4). With a share of nearly 7%, the Netherlands is Kenya’s third most important export destination, behind only the US and Pakistan. Kenya supplies mainly flowers and plants to the Netherlands and was the second most important supplier of those goods to our country last year. Uruguay exported 5% of all its goods to the Netherlands in 2022, making the Netherlands Uruguay’s fifth-biggest export market. The main goods types Uruguay supplied to our country in 2022 were paper pulp, paper waste and beef.

3.7 References



Aerts, N., Berg, van den, M., Creemers, S., Draper, H., Mounir, A., & Rooyakkers, J. (2022). . In D. Herbers & M. Jaarsma (Eds.), Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures 2022: Exports, imports and investment. Statistics Netherlands.

De Boer (2024). . [Gas prices continue to decline, the energy crisis is over]. Het Financieele Dagblad.

Bonam, D. (2024). [Inflation was higher in euro countries that import more]. Economisch Statistische Berichten.

Statistics Netherlands (2021, 10 December). [High transit of goods, yields relatively low]. Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2023a). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2023b, 27 October). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024a). . [Dataset]. Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024b). . [Dataset]. Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024c, 2 May). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2024d). . Statistics Netherlands.

CLO (2023). [Energy use by industries]. Environmental Data Compendium.

CPB (2024). [World trade declined in 2023]. CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis.

Creemers, S., Jaarsma, M., & Rooyakkers, J. (2022). [Mainly fewer re-exports to the UK since Brexit]. Economisch Statistische Berichten.

Creemers, S., Jaarsma, M., & Rooyakkers, J. (2023). . In S. Creemers & D. Herbers (Eds.), Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures 2023: exports, imports and investments. Statistics Netherlands.

DNHK (2022, 21 June). [German independence – on gas and crude oil, but also on raw materials]. Duits-Nederlandse Handelskamer. Accessed on 1 May 2024.

European Council (2024). .

Freeman, R., Manova, K., Prayer, T., & Sampson, T. (2022). . Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics and Political Science.

Jongsma, M. (2024, 5 January). [2023 was an expensive year, but not all prices increased]. Het Financieele Dagblad. Accessed on 19 April 2024.

KNMP (2024). [Number of pharmaceutical shortages over 2023 higher than ever]. Royal Dutch Pharmacists Association (KNMP).

Lucas, J. (2023, 27 October). [Imports from china declining, which is bad news for China]. BNR. Accessed on 1 May 2024.

Luman, R. (2024, 3 January). [Automotive market makes slow progress in 2024] ING. Accessed on 19 April 2024.

Pohu, C. (2022, 15 September). “ [No more blackmail and no more naivety: Germany is reviewing its trade relationship with China]. Business AM. Accessed on 1 May 2024.

Rademakers, R., Houbiers, T., Konietzny, R., & Oomes, N. (2024). [Abnormal increase in exports of sanctioned goods to ‘fallback countries’]. Economisch Statistische Berichten.

UNCTAD (2024). . United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.





Noten

Based on the concept of border crossing, see CBS (2023a) for more information on the figures used.

We have used data from CEPII. Information about specific goods is not available in the CEPII-CHELEM data. In order to be able to interpret the findings based on the CEPII-CHELEM data, in sections 3.5 and 3.6, CBS figures at product level are used as a mirror image of international trade flows.

In contrast to re-exports, goods in quasi-transit trade do not come into the ownership of a firm or person based in the Netherlands. This is the category of exports from which the Netherlands earns the least (CBS, 2021). In 2023, quasi-transit trade amounted to €179.7bn. That was 5% less than in 2022, when the figure was €189.2bn. Quasi-transit trade is not considered further in this section.

Due to differences in international trade methods and concepts, these figures deviate from the existing trade deflators of CBS, including when we look at price developments at product level (CBS, 2024a). However, qualitatively and in terms of trend, we see the same price developments.

See also CBS (2024b) for trade per continent and for the countries in each continent.

In accordance with the SITC-3 classification.International trade in services

Authors: Sarah Creemers, Roger Voncken

This chapter focuses on the international services trade. What did the Dutch services trade look like in 2023? Which types of services were imported or exported more, and which ones were imported or exported less? What were the most important countries of origin and destinations for Dutch trade in services? How important was the Netherlands to the services trade of other countries around the world? How did the Dutch market share in world trade develop? In this chapter, we answer these and other questions by analysing the composition and geographical dimension of Dutch service imports and exports.

4.1 Key findings

Dutch services exports in 2023

In 2023, the Netherlands exported services worth 290.8bn euros to foreign countries. This represents a 5.5% increase compared to 2022.

Based on the National Accounts – which, for instance, exclude Special Purpose Entities (SPEs) – there was an increase in services exports of 4.8%. The export volume is estimated to have decreased by 1.3% compared to 2022, while export prices are estimated to have risen by 6.2%. This indicates that the growth in export value was entirely attributable to significantly higher export prices.

With a share of 30.5%, business services were once again the largest category of services exported by the Netherlands by value in 2023. Business services include industrial services, maintenance and repair, construction services, insurance services, government services, and personal, cultural, and recreational services. Transport services and telecommunication, computer, and information services complete the top three.

Compared to 2022, business services exports grew by the most in value (up by €7.6bn). The largest absolute drop was in exports of transport services; in 2023, the export value of this category of services was €3.1bn lower than in 2022. This drop occurred particularly in maritime freight and other transportation.

Germany, the US, UK, Ireland and France were the main destinations for Dutch services exports in 2023. These five largest export partners accounted for 47.6% of the Dutch services export. The Germans, Americans, and British primarily purchased business services and transport services from us.

The US was the most important destination for Dutch business services in 2023. For the export of telecommunication, computer, and information services, Ireland was the top destination. Germany was the largest recipient of Dutch transport services by value in 2023.

Dutch services imports in 2023

In 2023, the total import of services increased by 4.8% compared to 2022, amounting to €273.3bn.

Based on the National Accounts – which, among other aspects, exclude Special Purpose Entities – there was an increase in services imports of 8.2%. The import volume increased by much less than import prices, at 0.5% and 7.7%, respectively.

Business services dominated imports in 2023 with a share of 34.9%, followed by transport services and charges for the use of intellectual property.

Relative to 2022, business service imports grew the most in absolute terms, with an increase of €7.3bn. The biggest drop in absolute terms was seen in the import of transport services: in 2023, the import value of this service category was €2.8bn lower than the previous year, primarily due to a decline in sea freight transport.

The US, UK, Germany, Ireland and France were the main sources of services imports into the Netherlands in 2023. These five largest import partners accounted for 57.5% of the Dutch services imports. Charges for the use of intellectual property dominated imports from the US. For imports from the UK, it was business services. Services imports from Germany consisted mainly of business services and transport services.

The UK was the most important supplier of business services to the Netherlands in 2023, while Germany was the main supplier of transport services. In terms of value, US imports were dominant in charges for the use of intellectual property in 2023.

The Netherlands as an international service provider in 2022

The figures from an international perspective are sourced from the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The most recent figures are from 2022.

2022 was a record year for the international trade in services, with the highest value of services ever traded in global terms.

In 2022, the Netherlands provided 3.8% of all globally exported services, making it the ninth-largest services exporter in the world. The US is the largest services supplier by far.

In Belgium, the Netherlands was the largest provider of services. In 2022, 13.8% of Belgium’s service imports came from the Netherlands. The Netherlands is a prominent supplier of services related to freight transport as well as business services.

The Netherlands as an international service consumer in 2022

In 2022, the Netherlands imported 4% of all globally imported services, making it the seventh-largest services importer in the world by value. The US, China and Germany are the largest importers of services in the world, although China’s importance has declined significantly in recent years.

Belgium exports the most services to the Netherlands; 13.6% of Belgium’s total services exports are destined for the Netherlands. Romania and Lithuania also export a relatively large amount of services to the Netherlands, primarily due to the freight transport sector.

Outline

In this chapter, we consider both the composition and the geographical dimension of the Dutch trade in services. In sections 4.3 to 4.4, we do so from a Dutch perspective. Dutch service exports are discussed in more detail in section 4.3. What is the composition of Dutch exports? How important are other countries for Dutch service exports? Section 4.4 provides details on Dutch service imports. In sections 4.5 to 4.6, we reverse the roles and look at the Dutch trade in services from the perspective of our trading partners. Based on data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD, 2024), in these sections we zoom in on the importance of the Netherlands as a country of destination and origin of services for a number of important trading countries. The importance of the Netherlands for the global trade in services is also discussed. The relevant figures are obtained from the World Trade Organization (WTO, 2024).

4.2 Key developments in the Dutch services trade

Goods are tangible and are often used as an input for all or part of the production process, or are available for consumers to buy in a supermarket or shop. Unlike goods, services are not tangible and are less visible. In principle, the international trade in goods consists of goods physically crossing borders, whereas the international trade in services involves financial cross-border flows (CBS, 2017).

The international trade in services relates to service transactions between two parties based in two different countries. Usually, those transactions are between firms, but in some cases – for example travel services or personal and cultural services – individuals are also involved. If a person in the Netherlands is paid for services provided to a person based abroad, this represents an export of Dutch services. Conversely, a Dutch service import is when a firm or person from the Netherlands pays for services provided by a company or person based abroad. By way of illustration, if an engineer flies to China on behalf of a Dutch construction firm to provide advice on construction activities, we would describe that as a Dutch export of engineering services to China. If a Dutch IT company requests the assistance of a call centre in India, we would describe that as a Dutch import of business services.

International trade in services ever more important globally

Although services may be less visible than goods, they play a crucial role in the global economy. Since the 1990s, the service sector has been the most important source of economic growth. Logistics, information technology and financial services are an essential part of modern economies, while business services, healthcare services and entertainment are among the fastest-growing sectors worldwide (WTO & World Bank, 2023). Services account for more than two-thirds of global gross domestic product (GDP), twice the combined share of agriculture and industry. And the service sector employs more people and creates more jobs than any other sector (Sauvé, 2023).

Additionally, more and more research suggests that growth of the service sector is an important impetus for countries’ development (Baldwin & Forslid, 2020; Nayyar et al., 2021). For instance, research by the World Bank (2014) shows that a 1% increase in GDP growth originating from the service sector is associated with a reduction in poverty by approximately 0.96%. By way of comparison, if the same GDP growth is generated by agriculture, poverty falls by 0.67%. Growth in production-related sectors has no significant impact on poverty reduction. As such, further liberalisation of the service sector has the potential to help countries reduce poverty, because there is also evidence of production-boosting effects generated by the services trade (Fu et al., 2023; Nayyar et al., 2021).

The importance of the service sector is also reflected in the growing trade in services. Driven by developments in information and communication technology (ICT), exports of commercial services nearly tripled worldwide between 2005 and 2022 – and exports of digitally delivered services were up nearly fourfold. The trade in goods also grew in this period, but less rapidly than the trade in services (WTO & World Bank, 2023). The increasing importance of the international trade in services also applies to the Netherlands. In 2022, the contribution of service exports to Dutch GDP was 13.6%. In 1995, only 7.1% of GDP had been attributable to services exports (CBS, 2016). To put these figures into perspective: in 2022, domestic goods exports accounted for 17.2% of Dutch GDP and re-exports for 4.3% (see also Chapter 6 of this publication for more information about Dutch export earnings).

Redesign of International Trade in Services statistics

Due to a redesign of the International Trade in Services statistics as of 2020, a revised methodology applies to the series for the international trade in services. Two separate collections of time series have therefore emerged: one original collection of series for the 2014–2020 period (CBS, 2022), and one new collection of series that start in 2020 (CBS, 2023), the year in which the redesign took place. In order to be able to chart developments over a longer time period, for this edition of Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures, new, long time series have been developed in which trends from the original series are linked to the values and developments from the ‘new’ series. This means that it is possible to chart developments since 2014 instead of from 2020. Ahead of the future revision of the time series for the international services trade, several specific changes – which are limited in impact – have also been implemented in some time series, based on new information about the Dutch services trade.

Growth in value of trade continues in 2023

In 2023, the Netherlands exported €290.8bn worth of services (see Figure 4.2.1). In the same year, our country imported €273.3bn in services from other countries. The value of services exports and imports grew by 5.5% and 4.8%, respectively, compared to a year before.

In early 2020, the world was confronted with COVID-19. Over the subsequent months, this led to the imposition of measures to slow the spread of the virus. The Netherlands, too, felt the effects of COVID-19 and the subsequent measures, which also had an impact on international trade. Dutch trade in services fell more sharply in 2020 than the trade in goods. Compared to the trade in goods, the trade in services was not only harder hit, it was also affected for a longer period (Poulissen et al., 2022 and CBS, 2021; 2022b). However, the pandemic was not the only cause. Previous research by CBS (Poulissen et al., 2022) showed that corporate restructurings – possibly driven by a changing fiscal climate in the Netherlands for multinationals – inhibited the growth of the international trade in services. 2020 was also the year that the UK left the EU, as we can read in the second chapter of this publication.

Prices of service trade grew more rapidly than volume

Besides the pandemic, corporate restructuring and Brexit, worldwide disruptions to production chains, shortages of microchips and higher energy costs – and the associated high levels of inflation – may also have had an impact on the international services trade.

An increase in trade value can be the result of an increased volume of services, higher prices for those services or a combination of the two. No detailed price indices are currently available at CBS that would allow the volume and price effects to be easily distinguished from one another within the International Trade in Services statistics. However, it is possible to provide an indication based on the data that are known for the composition of GDP, based on final expenditure, from the CBS National Accounts (CBS, 2024) (see figures 4.2.2 and 4.2.3). It should be noted that these data sources do not apply exactly the same principles with regard to the international services trade. For instance, special purpose entities are not included in the National Accounts.

The prices of goods exports have risen much more sharply than those of service exports; see Chapter 3 of this publication for trends in volume and price of the Dutch goods trade. For instance, the price of exported goods rose by 21% between 2021 and 2022, whereas the increase in the price of exported services was only 6.6%. The rise in export prices of goods is largely explained by the fact that the imported products that are used as input for the production of the exports themselves rose in price. The price rises for goods and services in the Netherlands in 2022 were primarily driven by price rises abroad (Groot et al., 2023).

The total export value of services rose by 5.5% between 2022 and 2023, to €290.8bn. Based on the concepts used in the National Accounts, the percentage was 4.8%. In 2023, export prices rose 6.2% year on year. The only year between 2015 and 2023 in which export prices rose more sharply was 2022. Figure 4.2.2 shows that export volume actually fell in 2023. This means that the growth in export value is entirely attributable to significantly higher export prices.

The Netherlands spent a record amount on services imports in 2023. Import value was up by 4.8% in 2023 compared to 2022, reaching €273.3bn. Based on the concepts used in the National Accounts – which do not include, for example, special purpose entities – the increase was actually 8.2%. The main reason for this increase was again significantly higher import prices (see Figure 4.2.3). Between 2022 and 2023, import volume rose by 0.5%, whereas prices increased by 7.7%. Due to imported inflation, the Netherlands earned less from trade in relative terms because the prices of the services we imported from abroad rose much more quickly than the prices of the services we exported (Groot et al., 2023).

4.3 Dutch service exports in detail

Figure 4.3.1 shows the composition of Dutch service exports. As in previous years, business services were the most important service type for Dutch exports in 2023. Of all services exported by the Netherlands, 30.5% were business services, followed by transport services – with a share of 19.9% – and telecommunications, computer and information services – with a share of 14.3%. The export value of transport services and fees for the use of intellectual property was lower in 2023 than in 2022.

Growth in exports of business and financial services…

In business services and telecommunications, computer and information services, we see a higher value compared to a year before. In table 4.3.2, we look at the different types of services in more detail. We see growth especially in technical, trade-related and other services, professional and management consultancy services, and computer and information services. Companies in the Netherlands exported financial services worth €17.5bn in 2023, which was up by 40% since 2022. This substantial increase is mainly attributable to the indirectly observed services of financial institutions (see also table 4.3.2). These are the costs paid indirectly for banking services. For example, banks’ interest result. Consequently, the share of financial services in the Dutch export basket increased from 4.5% in 2022 to 6.0% in 2023.

... but a decline in exports of transport services

In 2023, exports of transport services were around €3.1bn less than in 2022. That reduction may be attributed to a lower export value of maritime freight transport and other transport, partly due to significant price fluctuations in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. When firms or individuals in the Netherlands supply transport services to foreign firms or consumers, these count as exports. The transaction with a foreign party is what matters and not the country in which the service is actually provided. The export of intellectual property was also smaller in 2023 compared to 2022. We observe a decrease of €1.2 bn, which is a decline of 3.1%.

Record value of inbound travel

Due to the measures to combat COVID-19, international travel fell back sharply in 2020: in 2020, foreign spending by Dutch travellers was 50.3% lower than in 2019. Inbound travel equals all expenditure by foreign travellers within the Netherlands, i.e. travel services exports. In 2023, inbound travel was higher than in 2019, the last year before the pandemic, marking the first increase since that time. With a share of 6.6% of total export value, travel services were the fifth-biggest service type in 2023, as they were in 2022. In 2023, we observe a growth of 23% (+€3.6bn) compared to 2022. This increase is seen in both business and private travel.

Europe remains the most important destination for Dutch services

Figure 4.3.3 visually represents the shares of the different regions in export value in 2023. In 2023, 69.8% of all service exports from the Netherlands were destined for European countries, whereas only 15.0% were destined for North and South America and 12.4% for the Asian market. In 2015, the European export share was 59.7%: Europe has therefore become more important as a market for Dutch services. At the same time, the export share of North and South America fell by 8.0 percentage points between 2015 and 2023. This correlates with previous research by CBS which shows that there has been a reduction in services exports particularly to countries outside the EU (Poulissen et al., 2022). The Netherlands is not unique in this. OECD figures indicate that international trade is becoming increasingly regional – a shift that is in line with the current geopolitical trend to reduce dependence on other power blocs (The Economist, 2019).

The EU single or internal market facilitates free movement of goods, people, services and capital. It stimulates economic growth, trade and innovation (Barendregt & Wijffelaars, 2017; European Council, 2024). In 2006, the European Services Directive was introduced in order to make it easier for firms to offer their services in other EU countries (Van der Heijden et al., 2021). According to the European Commission, since 1993, the internal market has created 2.5 million new jobs in the EU, achieved a five-fold increase in trade between member states and generated more than €800bn in additional income (EU Monitor, 2023). Nevertheless, the trade in services is often still hampered by differences in national regulations (Barendregt & Wijffelaars, 2017; European Council, 2024). In a previous study (CBS, 2022c), we considered the barriers encountered by firms wishing to start exporting services or expand their service exports.

Germany, US and UK most important export partners

Figure 4.3.4 shows that Germany, the US and the UK have been our principal export partners for years. In 2023, over one-third of export value went to these three partners. In 2023, 26.8% of the export basket to Germany consisted of business services. Transport and travel services also accounted for a relatively large share. With a share of 45.5%, business services dominated exports to the US, followed by transport services and telecommunications, computer and information services. These three service types also played a big role in exports to the UK.

The relative importance of Germany increased in 2023: from 13.3% in 2022 to 14.0% in 2023. In 2023, the value of service exports to Germany totalled €40.6bn, an 11% increase compared to 2022. With growth of €4.0bn year on year, Germany was the biggest climber in absolute terms. That growth was primarily due to higher export value in business services, including technical and trade-related services, travel services and financial services to our eastern neighbours.

Ireland and France completed the top 5, with export shares of 7.0% and 6.1%, respectively. The value of Dutch exports to Ireland was 12.0% less in 2023 than in 2022. Following changes to fiscal rules, including the fiscal treatment of multinationals (NOS Nieuws, 2021; Poulissen et al., 2022; Taylor, 2020), we see a lower export value of fees for the use of intellectual property in particular.

Nearly half of total export value to the five main export partners

Figure 4.3.5 shows the shares of the top five export partners in the six most important service types in terms of value. In 2023, 47.6% of Dutch service exports went to the five main export partners. They were Germany, the US, the UK, Ireland and France. The share of the top five destinations was the largest in financial services, at 60.2% of the total export value of financial services. In 2023, the largest share of financial services in terms of value went to the UK. The share of the top five destinations was second highest in travel, at 57.5% of total inbound travel. With a share of 42.7%, Germany was the most important country for travel exports by some distance. Germany was also the most important market for exports of transport services in 2023, although the difference with the US in second place was smaller: 16.0% compared to 11.4%. The US was the most important destination for business services: 15.9% of business services exports went to that country. 14.3% of all exports of telecommunications, computer and information services went to Ireland in 2023. This represents the biggest share of that service type by value.

4.4 Dutch service imports in detail

Figure 4.4.1 shows the composition of Dutch imports of services. In 2023, the six largest service types accounted for 90.9% of total Dutch service imports. Business services headed the list, followed by transport services and fees for the use of intellectual property. In 2023, business services accounted for just under 35% of Dutch import value. For transport services and intellectual property fees, the respective figures were 17.6% and 14.1%. Imports of other services – industrial services, maintenance and repair services, construction services, insurance services, personal, cultural and recreational services, and public services – were only responsible for a small proportion of total Dutch service imports.

The import value of transport services and fees for the use of intellectual property was lower in 2023 than in 2022. The ‘other’ service types had a higher import value in 2023 than in 2022.

A plus for business and financial services…

In categories including business services and financial services, we saw a higher value compared to a year before. In table 4.4.2, which shows a more detailed picture, we see growth especially in technical and trade-related services, professional and management consultancy services, and indirectly observed services of financial institutions. Imports of business services grew rapidly in 2023: €7.3bn more than in 2022. Firms in the Netherlands imported financial services worth €19.7bn in 2023, which was 32.1% more than in 2022. As was the case for exports, that rise was largely due to the increase in indirectly observed services of financial institutions. The share of financial services in the Dutch import basket grew from 5.7% in 2022 to 7.2% in 2023.

…and a minus for transport services and fees for the use of intellectual property

In 2023, imports of transport services were around €2.8bn less than in 2022. That reduction may be attributed to a lower import value of maritime freight transport. Transport services diminished in importance: their share in total import value fell from 19.5% in 2022 to 17.6% in 2023. Imports of intellectual property – fees for the use of intellectual property – were substantially lower in 2023 than in 2022. We observe a decrease of €2.bn1, or –‍5.2%, largely due to a reduction in imports of franchises and similar rights. The import share of this service type fell from 15.6% in 2022 to 14.1% a year later.

Outbound travel still lower than before pandemic

In 2023, the expenditure of Dutch travellers abroad were 5.3% lower than in 2019. Those expenditure fell drastically due to the COVID-19 measures in 2020 and 2021. Outbound travel is on the rise, but it had not yet reached its pre-pandemic level by 2023. Expenditure by Dutch travellers while abroad, also known as outbound travel, are regarded as imports of services. In 2019, 9.5% of total import value consisted of travel services. In 2020 and 2021, that share fell to 3.8%, after which it rose again in 2023 to 7.2%.

The Americas less significant as an import region than in 2015

The continent of Europe is the main source of Dutch service imports. In 2023, 68.0% of Dutch service imports came from European countries (see Figure 4.4.3). Besides Europe, the Americas region is also an important supplier of services to our country. In 2023, Dutch imports of services from countries in North and South America totalled €60.3bn, which is 2.6 times more than imports from Asia and 26 times more than imports from Africa. In 2015, the American import share was 37.8%. One year later, that share had already fallen to a level comparable to that of 2023. Nevertheless, this means that the US became less important as a supplier of Dutch services in the 2015–2023 period. Over the same period, the European import share increased by 14.1 percentage points.

Almost one-fifth of service imports sourced from the US

If we look at the individual countries, the US was the leading supplier of imports to the Netherlands in 2023 (see Figure 4.4.4). This has not changed since 2015. In 2023, import value was €50.2bn. In 2023, 41.7% of the import basket from the US consisted of fees for the use of intellectual property. Business services also accounted for a relatively large share. Total service imports from the US were around €1.3bn lower in 2023 than in 2022. That contraction is due to reduced imports of fees for the use of intellectual property from the US.

With a share of 31.6%, business services dominated imports from Germany, followed by transport and travel services. Germany and Ireland did increase their shares of services supplied. For the two countries together, we see an increase of €5.6bn compared to 2022, leaving Germany and Ireland with import shares of 11.8% and 8.3%, respectively, in 2023. In the case of Germany, that growth was primarily attributable to a higher import value for financial services. For Ireland, we see an increased import value in fees for the use of intellectual property between 2022 and 2023.

More than half of payments for the use of intellectual property accrue to the US

Figure 4.4.5 shows the shares of the five main countries of origin for the six most important service types in terms of import value. In 2023, 57.5% of Dutch service imports came from our five main import partners – the US, the UK, Germany, Ireland and France. Imports of fees for the use of intellectual property, financial services, business services and telecommunications, computer and information services were concentrated on the five main import partners. In 2023, we imported over half of those service types from the US, the UK Germany, Ireland and France. The US was the primary recipient of payments for the use or distribution of intellectual property. Imports of transport and travel services were less concentrated on the five main import partners; the five most important import partners combined accounted for 40.8% and 39.0% of the import value of transport and travel services, respectively. The highest share of travel services came from Germany and Belgium. Germany, Spain, France, Belgium and Italy were the countries where Dutch travellers spent the most money in 2023.

4.5 Importance of the Netherlands as a supplier of services for other countries

Up to this point, we have examined the trade in services from a Dutch perspective. In the next two sections, we analyse the trade in services from an international perspective. This section discusses the role that the Netherlands performs as a supplier of services in the global economy, and for individual countries. Section 4.6 makes the same analysis, but from the perspective of the Netherlands as a consumer of international services.

As mentioned previously in this chapter, services are rapidly gaining importance in the global economy. The trade in services is growing faster than the trade in goods. Demographic trends, technological innovations and high incomes point to a further increase in the services trade in the future. UK analyses assume that by 2035, 28% of trade will consist of services, compared to 21% in 2021 (UK Government, 2023). Some World Trade Organization scenarios even assume that the share of services in global trade will increase by 50% by 2040 (WTO, 2019).

It remains to be seen whether these scenarios will turn out to be accurate, but what is certain is that services are becoming ever more important in the global economy and trade – despite the fact that services are more difficult to trade than goods. For example, a notary based in Utrecht is not qualified to draw up wills in New York, and a dentist in London cannot perform fillings in Maastricht. As such, the trade in services is traditionally associated with higher costs than the trade in goods. This is largely due to more complex policy regimes and the so-called ‘proximity burden’; for services, there is generally a greater need for suppliers and consumers to be in each other’s vicinity compared to the goods trade (The Economist, 2019; WTO, 2019). Set against that are the enormous advances in information and communication technologies, such as the internet, which have provided a massive boost to the trade in services. These technological developments increase opportunities to supply services remotely.

Use of data sources for the international perspective

In order to place the Dutch services trade in an international perspective, including the importance of the Netherlands for the trade of individual trading partners, we are dependent on international data sources.

In the last edition of Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures, we used an enriched and harmonised dataset from the WTO-OECD – known as BaTIS – to analyse the Dutch services trade with different trading partners and types of services. At the time of writing this chapter, no new edition of that dataset is available. For this reason, in this instance we have used information from alternative sources – the ‘International trade in services’ dataset of the OECD (2024) and the ‘Commercial services exports by sector and partner’ dataset of the World Trade Organization (WTO, 2024). The most recent reporting year for both sources is 2022.

For the analysis of the global shares in the services trade, it is important that the data is as complete as possible in terms of reporting countries for the most recent years. Because a breakdown by service types or partner countries is not necessary in this case, we have opted to use the WTO data, which is composed of data from the IMF, Eurostat, OECD and national statistics institutes. This data source contains the most recent data on total exports and imports for the reporting countries. For bilateral trading relations, we have used the OECD dataset, which is the best populated dataset for the most important Dutch trading partners in 2022. A drawback is that not all countries are included: it is a selection of OECD countries.

These two sources also serve as the basis for the BaTIS dataset, but they have not been balanced or enriched. This means that there may be discrepancies between the import and export totals between individual countries, and at the total level, and that there may be gaps in the data. Because different datasets have had to be used for this edition, the figures may deviate from other editions of Dutch Trade in Facts and Figures.

More international services supplied worldwide in 2022 than ever before

Global services exports appear to have fully recovered from the coronavirus crisis. In 2022, countries around the world exported a record value of services, to the tune of US$7,094bn. That represents a rise of over 14% compared to 2021, and an increase of over 12% compared to 2019, the previous record year. In 2010 – the starting year for our analyses – the World Trade Organization reported global services exports worth US$3,986bn.

The Netherlands drops down list of biggest service suppliers despite stable role

Figure 4.5.1 shows that the Netherlands is among the most important service exporters in the world. In 2022, our country was in ninth place in terms of the volume of services exports, with a share of 3.8%. The importance of the Netherlands has remained reasonably stable; its share has fluctuated around 4% between 2010 and 2022. However, the Netherlands has dropped three places down the rankings since 2010, being overtaken by Ireland, India and Singapore.

Of all the countries in the top 10, the significance of three in particular has increased, with Ireland leading the way. Since 2010, this relatively small economy has seen its share of services exports increase by 2.7 percentage points to 5% – more than double. However, that share needs to be put into perspective, as it cannot be seen in isolation from Ireland’s attractive rate of corporation tax, which has made it a magnet for multinational tech and pharmaceuticals companies. Although those companies do earn a lot of money in Ireland – so boosting GDP – they generally channel the profits to their head offices or letterbox companies abroad (The Economist, 2023). India’s growth is largely attributable to its highly developed IT services sector, with a strong focus on software, financial and business support services. This contributed to the growth of the Indian digital industry being over double that of the overall national economy (Cremers et al., 2023; Gajbhiye et al., 2022). Singapore in turn has benefited from recent reforms to reduce trade barriers in the service sector (OECD, 2023).

Large economies like the US, the UK and Japan have actually been losing ground as suppliers of services on the world stage since 2010. Nevertheless, the US and the UK remain the two main global suppliers of services, with a combined share of over 20%. Japan – the world’s third-largest economy – is just about in the top 10 of the world’s largest service suppliers.

Dutch services by far the most important for Belgium

Of all countries, Belgium is the most important consumer of Dutch services in relative terms. In 2022, some 13.8% of its total services imports came from the Netherlands. The Netherlands did not account for a greater share of total services imports for any other country in the OECD database with services imports of at least US$1bn. As such, the Netherlands was Belgium’s main supplier of services. The Netherlands is a prominent supplier of cargo transport for Belgium by road, rail and water. Our southern neighbours also make extensive use of our technical, trade-related and other business services, with other countries following at some distance behind.

We note that countries to which the Netherlands supplies a relatively large share of their services imports are not necessarily those which lie closest to the Netherlands geographically; Finland and Romania complete the top 3 (see Figure 4.5.2). Services related to maritime freight transport are the most important Dutch services consumed by Finland, whereas purchases of services and goods by seasonal workers and other temporary workers explain the relatively high share of Dutch services in Romanian imports.

Ireland is a noticeable climber on this list. Ireland is one of the biggest exporters of computer services, with a global share of 27% in 2021. And the demand for computer services has grown significantly in recent years. Global exports of computer services were 45% higher in 2022 than before COVID-19: the pandemic boosted that growth due to the increase in homeworking, online learning and entertainment. The demand for software, cloud services, machine learning and improved cybersecurity also continues to grow worldwide (WTO, 2023). As such, the Netherlands is also making increasing use of Irish computer services.

If we look at the countries that purchase less than $1bn worth of Dutch services, Iceland in particular stands out. In 2022, Dutch services made up 9.4% of Iceland’s total services imports. A year before, the figure had been 11.1%. As with Finland, these are primarily services related to maritime freight transport and support services, which explain this relatively large share of the Netherlands in Icelandic services imports.

4.6 Importance of the Netherlands as a buyer of services for other countries

For 2022, the World Trade Organization reported worldwide imports of services worth US$6,554bn. The alert reader will notice that this figure deviates from the value of exports reported previously, when logically they should be the same. After all, one country’s imports are another country’s exports. However, the World Trade Organization’s data has not been harmonised, and trade flows are not known for all countries, resulting in discrepancies. For more information, see also the text box in section 4.5. Nevertheless, as we saw for exports, more international services were purchased in 2022 than ever before: an increase of nearly 15% compared to a year before.

Worldwide, six countries consume more foreign services than the Netherlands

The Dutch share of global services imports was 4% in 2022. That is 0.4 percentage points lower than in the preceding four years. If we consider the past two decades, we observe an increasing role for our country in global services imports. In 2022, the Netherlands occupied seventh place worldwide in terms of the level of services imports.

The main buyers of foreign services are the US, China and Germany (see Figure 4.6.1). Together, these three countries are the destination for nearly a quarter of all international services worldwide. Whereas both the US and Germany obtained more services from abroad in 2022 – compared to 2019 – China did not. To what extent this is linked to the after-effects of the pandemic and/or represents strategic choices is not entirely clear. In 2019, China already imported fewer services than a year before. In any event, this does mark a reduction in China’s importance as a destination for services globally, although it did just about retain second place on that list in 2022.

The Netherlands the largest market for Belgian services

Of all the countries in the OECD database, the highest proportion of Belgian services go to the Netherlands; our country is the destination for 13.6% of total Belgian services exports. Overall, this left the Netherlands as Belgium’s second-biggest export partner in 2022. In 2021, the share had been 14.7%. Services related to other transport, explicitly charged financial services and other business services play a primary role in this export flow.

Not only is Romania a relatively large buyer of Dutch services – as we saw in section 4.5 – the Netherlands is also an important destination for Romanian services, in particular due to the freight transport industry. The same applies to Lithuania. For large European economies, the importance of the Netherlands as a destination is slightly less, but those countries are still in the top 10 countries with the largest Dutch share of their exports. The Netherlands is the sixth-largest destination for service exports for France, Spain and Germany; for the UK, our country is the fifth-largest export destination.

4.7 References



Baldwin, R., & Forslid, R. (2020). . NBER Working Paper, No. 26731 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barendregt, E., & Wijffelaars, M. (2017). [The economic market is an unfinished success]. Economische Statistische Berichten, 102, 4754S.

CBS (2016, 13 October). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2017). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2021, 30 March). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2022a). . [Dataset]. Accessed on 15 April 2024.

CBS (2022b, 6 June). . Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2022c). Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2023). . [Dataset]. Accessed on 15 April 2024.

CBS (2024). . [Dataset]. Accessed on 5 April 2024.

Cremers, D., Herbers, D., & Rooyakkers, J. (2023). [India’s economic profile]. In S. Creemers & D. Herbers (Eds.) Internationalisation Monitor 2023, first edition: India. Statistics Netherlands.

EU Monitor (2023). [30 years of the single market: what is it and what does it yield?] Accessed on 18 April 2024.

European Council (2024). . Accessed on 18 April 2024.

Fu, X., Wang, T., & Yang, H. (2023). Sustainability MDPI, 15(8), 1–22.

Gajbhiye, D., Arora, R., Nahar, A., Yangdol, I. & Thakur, I. (2022). . RBI Bulletin December 2022. Reserve Bank of India.

Groot, S., Nauta, L., & Džambo, I. (2023, 12 October). [Large differences between sectors and operating profits]. Rabobank: RaboResearch. Accessed on 15 April 2024.

Heijden, van der, M., Hemmerlé, Y., Öztürk, B., Schalk, van, I., & Schuijren, C. (2021). . De Nederlandsche Bank (the Dutch central bank, DNB). Accessed on 18 April 2024.

Nayyar, G., Hallward-Driemeier, M., & Davies, E. (2021). . International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.

NOS News (2021, 7 October). . [Ireland finally agreed, global minimum profit tax a step closer] Accessed on 19 April 2024.

OECD (2023). . OECD Publishing.

OECD (2024). [Dataset]. Accessed on 1 May 2024.

OECD-WTO (2023). . [Dataset]. Accessed on 23 June 2023.

Poulissen, D., Rooyakkers, J., & Smit, R. (2022). De internationale dienstenhandel in woelige tijden. In D. Herbers & J. Rooyakkers (Eds.), . Statistics Netherlands.

Sauvé, P. (2023, 19 September). . World Bank Blogs. Accessed on 25 April 2024.

Taylor, C. (2020, 13 October). . The Irish Times. Accessed on 19 April 2024.

The Economist (2019, 24 January). . The Economist. Accessed on 23 May 2024.

The Economist (2023, 31 October). The Economist. Accessed on 24 May 2024.

UK Government (2023). . UK Government.

World Bank (2014). . Working Paper, No. 91207. World Bank Group.

WTO (2019). . World Trade Organization.

WTO (2023). . World Trade Organization.

WTO & World Bank (2023). . Accessed on 25 April 2024.

WTO (2024). . [Dataset]. Accessed on 1 May 2024.





Noten

Banks receive a higher interest rate on loans they provide and pay a lower interest on savings balances than the so-called interbank rate, the interest rate which banks charge each other when they lend to one another. Exports of intellectual property were also lower in 2023 than in 2022, falling by €1.bn2, or –‍3.1%.Foreign direct investment and multinationals

Authors: Manon Weusten (CBS), Anne Maaike Stienstra (DNB), Arjen Berkenbos (DNB)

Internationalisation and foreign direct investment go hand in hand. Investments ensure the exchange of capital and knowledge between different economies and contribute to the productivity and prosperity of both the investing country and the country of investment. The Netherlands is a major player in direct investment and is among the largest countries in the world in terms of inward and outward direct investment. Foreign-owned multinationals prefer the Netherlands for its central location, excellent infrastructure, highly-educated employees and stable legal system, among other things. Conversely, Dutch-owned multinationals also choose to invest abroad for a variety of reasons. This chapter first discusses inward and outward direct investment into and by the Netherlands. The following sections then zoom in on foreign-owned multinationals operating in the Netherlands and Dutch-owned multinationals abroad.

5.1 Key findings

Foreign direct investment (excluding SPEs)

As in 2021 and 2022, the US and the UK remained the most important partner countries for both Dutch inward FDI and outward FDI in 2023.

Total inward FDI fell to €3.404bn in 2023, a decrease of 8% compared to 2022. Total outward FDI amounted to €4.245bn at the end of 2023, a decrease of 6% from the previous year. For both incoming and outgoing investments, this is the lowest level in five years.

Multinationals in the Netherlands

In 2022, 2% of the Dutch business economy – around 26.4 thousand firms – were multinationals. However, at 98%, the majority of the Dutch business economy was still made up of non-multinationals, two-thirds of them operating as self-employed persons.

Within the Dutch business economy, 19% of total employment in the Dutch business economy were provided by foreign multinationals and 18 percent by Dutch multinationals. Dutch multinationals employed more people, in relative terms.

Foreign-owned and Dutch-owned multinationals were most likely to be active in the wholesale and retail trade, at 37% and 30% respectively, compared to 20% of the total Dutch business economy.

A quarter of total employment in the Netherlands was provided by the wholesale and retail trade This picture has not changed compared to previous years. For multinationals, the share of employment in the wholesale and retail trade was even higher at 29%.

In 2022, about 1 in 5 foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands were from the US (3,130 firms). Neighbouring countries also accounted for a significant proportion of foreign multinationals active in the Netherlands. Germany, the UK, Belgium and France together accounted for about 44% of foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands.

In absolute terms, multinationals from Germany, France and the UK topped the list of largest employers. Belgian multinationals provided relatively few jobs in the Netherlands. While US and German multinationals employed an average of 85 and 76 people, respectively, Belgian multinationals employed an average of 38.

Swiss multinationals in the Netherlands generated the most turnover per employee (FTE). In 2022, it was 1,446 thousand euros per FTE, an increase of 21% compared to the previous year. Chinese multinationals and US multinationals followed in second and third place.

Multinationals exported goods worth €411.0bn and imported goods worth €482.3bn euros in 2022. In services, the export value was €207.9bn and an import value of €193.5bn. Multinationals thus had a trade deficit in goods in 2022, but a trade surplus in services.

About two-thirds of multinationals were two-way traders. In addition, a large proportion of multinationals were importers, followed by non-traders. With an average of 10%, only a limited proportion of multinationals were exporters only. The distribution was different among non-multinationals: two-thirds of non-multinationals did not participate in international trade in 2022.

Dutch multinationals abroad

Germany remained the most popular country for Dutch-owned multinationals to invest in. The number of subsidiaries of Dutch multinationals in Germany increased further to 3,610 in 2022. The US and Belgium followed in second and third place respectively.

In 2022, the majority of employees working at Dutch subsidiaries were in the US with 420 thousand employees. 69% of this employment was created by subsidiaries in trade.

At an average of 615 people per firm, Dutch subsidiaries in Ukraine employed the most people in relative terms, driven by firms in mineral extraction and manufacturing. In Belgium, with an average of 43 people per Dutch-owned subsidiary, employed the fewest people in relative terms.

Subsidiaries of Dutch multinationals in the US had the highest turnover per employee (FTE). This increased from 592.4 thousand euros to 605.5 thousand euros per FTE from 2021 to 2022. Subsidiaries in Germany and France followed with 475.9 thousand euros and 441.7 thousand euros in turnover per FTE, respectively.

Outline

This chapter will consider foreign direct investment (FDI) in and by the Netherlands. Section 5.2 provides a general overview of the direct investment position of the Netherlands, based on macro figures from the Dutch central bank (DNB). Foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands are discussed in section 5.3 with CBS figures from the Inward Foreign Affiliates Statistics (IFATS) serving as a starting point. Dutch-owned multinationals abroad are the focus of section 5.4, based on CBS figures from the Outward Foreign Affiliates Statistics (OFATS).

5.2 Macro-level view of foreign direct investment

This section discusses the direct investment position of the Netherlands. Mutual foreign direct investment applies when an investor in one country holds a controlling interest of more than 10% in a subsidiary in another country. This means that the investor has a controlling interest and substantial degree of influence on the management of that subsidiary: for example, participation in a merger, takeover, the construction of new facilities, the reinvestment of profits from foreign operations or lending between the enterprise’s divisions. In line with European policy, Dutch macroeconomic statistics are subject to a major revision once every five years. For example, new information sources have been introduced to better describe the Netherlands’ relationships with foreign countries, and estimates were improved. The results of this revision were published in 2024. Figures from the previous years in this section have also been revised (Bijlsma et al., 2024), which is why they deviate from figures in earlier editions of this publication.

The figures and rankings in this section are directional figures. This means that investment by the subsidiary in the parent company is netted against investment by the parent company in the subsidiary.

Foreign direct investment in and by the Netherlands contracted in 2023

In 2023, the total inward foreign direct investment position dropped to €3.404bn, which was a decline of 8% in comparison to 2022. In 2023, the total outward foreign direct investment position stood at €4.245bn, which represented a decline of 6% compared to the year before. This was the lowest level in five years for both inward and outward foreign direct investment.

Dutch direct investment is largely concentrated in three statistical sectors (see Figure 5.2.1). In 2023, holdings, which focus mainly on financial services within their own enterprise group, and non-financial corporations each represent one-third of the inward and outward foreign direct investment position. Special Purpose Entities (SPEs), also referred to as letterbox companies, represented just under 30% of the foreign direct investment position. SPEs are typically set up for specific purposes, sometimes for tax reasons. Only 4% of the outward foreign direct investment position and 2% of the inward foreign direct investment position are accounted for by the remaining sectors, such as banks, other financial service providers, the government and households.

A considerable part of the decline in the foreign direct investment position was attributable to negative direct investment transactions in the fourth quarter of 2023. Negative transactions can occur, for example, through capital withdrawals, such as sales of existing interests, or the repayment of a loan by a subsidiary to the parent company. The majority of these transactions took place at holdings and SPEs. A possible explanation for negative direct investment is the introduction of a worldwide minimum tax of 15% on the profits of multinationals. This tax rule has been introduced by approximately 140 countries since 2024 and may be a reason for multinationals to adjust their international corporate structures (DNB, 2024). An important cause for the drop in the investment position of non-financial corporations are statistical reclassifications, which have shifted enterprises from the non-financial corporations sector to the sector of holdings. The increase in the inward foreign direct investment position at holding companies caused by these reclassifications is more than compensated by the decline mentioned previously.

US and UK continue to be key investments partners

The top 5 inward and outward foreign direct investment partners of the Netherlands in terms of the size of the direct investment position remained unchanged in 2023 compared to a year before. The US is invariably the Netherlands’ largest inward direct investment partner. Excluding money flows via Dutch-based SPEs, the UK, Germany, Luxembourg and Belgium make up the rest of the top 5 (see Figure 5.2.2). As at the end of 2022, at the end of 2023, these five countries were responsible for more than 60% of total foreign direct investment in the Netherlands. For the past three years, the ranking of countries in which the Netherlands invests, excluding SPEs, has consistently included the UK, the US, Switzerland, Germany and Luxembourg (see Figure 5.2.3). In 2023, this top 5 accounted for almost 45% of the Netherlands’ outward foreign direct investment position.

Changes in the ranking are affected by events involving individual enterprises. For example, the UK’s rise in 2021 was mainly attributable to Shell’s relocation from the Netherlands to the UK. Luxembourg owes its position in the top 5 partly to its role as a transit country. This is because the rankings presented here refer to the country from which the investment arrives from or goes to immediately, rather than where it originally came from or its ultimate destination. Like the Netherlands, Luxembourg serves as a transit hub for many multinationals when investing in other countries, making it a major trading partner of the Netherlands.

5.3 Multinationals in the Netherlands

This section looks specifically at multinationals active in the Netherlands. Multinationals are major players in the Dutch economy. They are internationally active and contribute to prosperity in our country. How many multinationals are active in the Netherlands? In which sectors are they active and how do they contribute to employment? How does this relate to the total Dutch enterprise population and what is the impact of multinationals for the Dutch trade in goods and services? This section also discusses the labour productivity of foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands.

What is a multinational?

A multinational is an enterprise that exercises ultimate control over enterprises in two or more countries. A Dutch-owned multinational is an enterprise under ultimate Dutch control with subsidiaries (majority stake) abroad. A foreign-owned multinational is a subsidiary based in the Netherlands that is ultimately controlled from abroad. Enterprises without a parent or subsidiary abroad are referred to as non-multinationals.

The number of multinationals in the Netherlands is growing again

The number of multinationals in the Dutch business economy is growing steadily year-on-year. From 2021 to 2022, the number of multinationals increased by 4% to 26.4 thousand (see Figure 5.3.1). While the share of Dutch-owned multinationals decreased by 3% from 2021 to 2022, the number of foreign-owned multinationals went up by 7%. However, the majority of the Dutch business economy continues to be represented by non-multinationals, at fully 98%. Two-thirds of this group consisted of self-employed persons ; 32% employed up to nine employees and only 3% had ten or more employees within the group of non-multinationals. The group of non-multinationals also expands every year. In 2022, it experienced growth comparable in relative terms to the growth in foreign-owned multinationals (7%).

The Netherlands has an internationally open and innovative business environment, making it an appealing country for foreign investors. For many years, the Netherlands has been among the top 5 countries in the world in terms of its direct investment position (DNB, 2024). Conversely, foreign-owned enterprises are equally important to the Netherlands. Research by Arnold and Javorcik (2009) shows that foreign-owned multinationals pass on knowledge and contribute to the economy and employment in the country of investment.

Multinationals create one in three jobs in the Dutch business economy.

While non-multinationals made up the largest share of the Dutch business economy at 98%, they accounted for only 64% of total employment in 2022. This is equivalent to 4.264 million jobs (see Figure 5.3.2). Whereas there were almost twice as many foreign-owned multinationals as Dutch-owned multinationals operating in the Netherlands, their contribution to employment of 19% and 18%, respectively, were actually similar. Dutch-owned multinationals thus provided work for more people, in relative terms. Employment at non-multinationals experienced slightly stronger growth than employment at multinationals, at 5% and 3% respectively. The relatively low number of employment opportunities at non-multinationals was mainly due to the large, ever-increasing group of sole proprietorships.

Majority of multinationals active in wholesale and retail trade

Figure 5.3.3 shows the distribution of foreign-owned and Dutch-owned multinationals by sector in relation to the Dutch business economy as a whole, including non-multinationals. Foreign-owned and Dutch-owned multinationals were most frequently active in wholesale and retail trade. At 37% and 30% respectively, a considerable share of multinationals operated in this sector in comparison with the total Dutch business economy (20%). Most enterprises represented the specialised business services sector in the total Dutch business economy (29%). This includes enterprises operating as employment agencies, security companies, human resource management companies, cleaning companies. This sector ranked second among multinationals. While Dutch-owned multinationals are relatively often present in the manufacturing sector (16%), foreign-owned multinationals ranked the manufacturing sector and the information and communication sector at a shared third place (both 13%). The distribution of enterprises by sector has remained relatively stable over the years.

Most persons on the payroll of Dutch-owned multinationals on average

In 2022, Dutch-owned multinationals had an average of 128 people on their payroll. Dutch-owned multinationals thus provided the most employment in relative terms (see Figure 5.3.4). The renting/leasing and other business services sector is the largest employer among the Dutch-owned multinationals with an average of 440 employees on the payroll. The relatively high number of employees in leasing/renting and other business services stems from employment agencies operating within this sector. While foreign-owned multinationals had an average of 73 persons on the payroll, non-multinationals only employed an average of three. The leasing/renting and other business services sector also topped the list among foreign-owned multinationals with an average of 210 employees per payroll. Relative to 2021, average employment had increased slightly among multinationals; non-multinationals actually had one less person on the payroll. The low number of employees on the payroll of non-multinationals was mainly driven by the large proportion of self-employed persons within this group.

Foreign-owned multinationals create relatively good jobs for employees in a country. In general, multinationals pay higher wages and, on average, they are more likely to offer training. On top of that, foreign-owned multinationals benefit countries by being productive and by investing relatively heavily in R&D, thereby ensuring knowledge development (Javorcik, 2015).

Wholesale and retail trade continues to be largest employer

A quarter of employment in the Netherlands is provided by wholesale and retail trade (see Figure 5.3.5). This picture has not changed relative to previous years. For multinationals, the share of employment in wholesale and retail trade was even higher at 29%. Leasing/renting and other business services ranked second in the Dutch business economy. This sector also ranked second among Dutch-owned multinationals, accounting for 22% of employment. With a 20% share, the manufacturing sector ranked second among foreign-owned multinationals in terms of employment. This was more than 1.5 times the employment provided by the manufacturing sector within the Netherlands’ business economy as a whole.

Most foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands continue to be under US control

In 2022, with 3,130 enterprises, approximately one in five foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands were under US control (see Figure 5.3.6). The number of multinationals under US control expanded from 2021 to 2022 by 4%, meaning the US continued to rank first in terms of the number of foreign-owned multinationals operating in the Netherlands. Not surprisingly, US-owned multinationals were also the largest foreign employer. In 2022, 265 thousand people worked for US-owned multinationals in the Netherlands.

Countries located closer to the Netherlands also made up a significant proportion of foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands. Together, Germany, the UK, Belgium and France accounted for approximately 44% of foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands. These countries therefore successively took the lead, after the US, in the list of foreign-owned multinationals in the Netherlands. In absolute terms, Germany, France and the UK topped the list of countries providing the most employment opportunities. Belgian-owned multinationals created relatively little employment in the Netherlands. While US-owned or German-owned multinationals employed an average of 85 and 76 persons per multinational respectively, a Belgian-owned multinational only had 38 persons on its payroll.

By contrast, French-owned multinationals employed 174 people on average, thus providing relatively ample employment opportunities. Multinationals under a (significant share of) French control operating in the Netherlands were active in the transportation sector, amongst others, including multinationals such as Air France KLM and Renault. Also, the French energy sector was well represented in the Netherlands with multinationals such as Engie, Total and Air Liquide (French Embassy in The Hague, 2022). French-owned multinationals also operated in other sectors. Consider waste management company SUEZ and French utility company Veolia, which focuses on a circular economy. As a last example, there is French-owned Danone, a division in the agri-food sector (the French Embassy in The Hague, 2022).

Swiss-owned multinationals in the Netherlands on the rise

Following the US and the aforementioned relatively nearby countries, Japan has been ranking sixth for years in terms of the number of foreign multinationals operating in the Netherlands. However, in 2022, Japan had to share its position with Swiss-owned multinationals: both accounted for 600 enterprises (also see Figure 5.3.7). The number of Swiss-owned multinationals active in the Netherlands increased considerably from 2021 to 2022. While Swiss-owned multinationals hardly increased in numbers from 2020 to 2021, their numbers rose by a staggering 9% from 2021 to 2022. However, Japanese-owned multinationals created substantially more employment in the Netherlands. In 2022, they had 83 thousand employed persons working for them and ranked fifth as such, ahead of Belgium. With 46 thousand employees, Swiss-owned multinationals accounted for almost half of the jobs created by Japanese-owned multinationals. This was also visible in relative terms. Where a Japanese-owned multinational employed an average of 138 persons, a Swiss-owned multinational provided work for 77 employed persons.

Switzerland is an attractive country for multinationals. The country has 26 cantons, each of which can set its own tax rate (Federal Department of Finance, 2024). Given the competition between cantons, tax rates remain relatively low. On average, the corporate tax rate in Switzerland, consisting of federal, cantonal and community taxes, is between 11.9% and 21.0% (PwC, 2024a). Not surprisingly, many multinationals choose to locate their (European) headquarters in, or relocate to Switzerland. Arguably, advantageous tax rates, among a variety of other reasons, could well account for an upsurge of multinationals in Switzerland. Still, even though Switzerland provides for a favourable tax rate for enterprises, the dividend tax of 35% for investors behind the enterprises is higher than in the Netherlands (PwC, 2024b).

In 2022, Swiss-owned multinationals in the Netherlands generated the most turnover per FTE

Figure 5.3.8 shows a measure of labour productivity in terms of the number of foreign-owned multinationals operating in the Netherlands, expressed as average turnover per full-time equivalent (FTE) (Haga et al., 2022; PwC, 2022). Swiss-owned multinationals in the Netherlands have the highest labour productivity measured in turnover per FTE. In 2022, they generated an average of approximately €1.446 million per FTE, an increase of 21% over the previous year. Chinese-owned multinationals and multinationals from the US in the Netherlands closely followed the Swiss-owned multinationals in 2022 with approximately €1.4 million turnover per FTE and €1.143 million per FTE respectively. Swiss-owned multinationals in the Netherlands recorded the most substantial increase in turnover per FTE from 2021 to 2022.

According to the International Labour Organization (ILO; 2024), the Netherlands ranked fifth in the world on labour productivity as measured by GDP per hour worked in 2023. It has been shown that foreign direct investment also contributes to the economy of the host country (Boghean & State, 2015). On the one hand, it contributes to technological and economic progress, but on the other hand, foreign-owned multinationals’ demand for qualified staff also results in an increase in the quality of workers in a country. Conversely, this means that foreign-owned multinationals also contribute to the Netherlands’ high labour productivity.

Multinationals have a trade deficit in goods, and a surplus in services

Foreign-owned multinationals accounted for the largest import and export flows measured in value, both in goods trade and trade in services (see Figure 5.3.8). 63% of the import of goods into the Netherlands by value was due to foreign-owned multinationals. This value totalled €356.8bn. Foreign-owned multinationals also accounted for a similar share of the export value of Dutch goods. Dutch-owned multinationals in turn represented 22% of the total Dutch import value of goods and 17% of the total Dutch export value of goods. Non-multinationals exported relatively many goods with a total of €87.6bn, even more than Dutch-owned multinationals, which totalled €86.1bn.

Each year the value of the total trade in services is significantly lower than the value of the total goods trade, and this was also the case in 2022. Once again, foreign-owned multinationals accounted for the largest share in the import and export value of services. In 2022, exports by foreign-owned multinationals amounted to €160.3bn. At €158.9bn, the import value topped out not much lower. Whereas Dutch-owned multinationals imported nearly 1.5 times as many goods as they exported, the situation is completely different with respect to the trade in services. Multinationals had a trade deficit in goods in 2022, but a surplus in the trade in services. In 2022, non-multinationals had a surplus for both trade flows, meaning they exported more than they imported.

Two-thirds of multinationals are two-way traders

In 2022, 65% of foreign-owned multinationals were two-way traders, meaning these multinationals traded both in imports and exports. For Dutch-owned multinationals, that percentage was slightly higher, at 73%. Additionally, a large proportion of multinationals were importers, followed by non-traders. Only a limited number of multinationals – 10% on average – operate exclusively as exporters. The figures are different among non-multinationals. Two-thirds of non-multinationals did not participate in international trade in 2022. About a quarter of non-multinationals operate exclusively as importers. Only a small share of non-multinationals were two-way traders or operated exclusively as exporters. The large share of non-multinationals is typical not only of the Netherlands. A large proportion of non-multinationals comprise small and medium-sized enterprises. Research shows that internationalisation, and the associated costs, is often reserved for a select group of larger, more productive enterprises with sufficient financial means (Chaney, 2005; Melitz, 2003).

5.4 Activity of Dutch-owned multinationals abroad

This section describes the subsidiaries of Dutch-owned multinationals abroad and provides answers to the following questions. In which countries do Dutch-owned multinationals operate? And how many jobs do they create abroad? It also looks at the labour productivity of Dutch-owned multinationals in foreign countries. Between 2020 and 2021, a trend reversal took place in response to the FRIBS Regulation, as a result of which the figures from this section cannot be compared with figures from previous editions.

Better to invest in a good neighbour or a far-away friend?

Figure 5.4.1 shows the number of foreign subsidiaries under Dutch control. Germany continues to be the preferred country for Dutch-owned multinationals to invest in. The number of subsidiaries of Dutch-owned multinationals in Germany grew further from 3,320 to 3,610 subsidiaries between 2021 and 2022, which represents an increase of 9%. Germany is an appealing country due to its central location, excellent infrastructural and success in innovation (DNHK, 2024). North Rhine-Westphalia is the most important federal state from an economic point of view, for both the Netherlands and Germany (DNHK, 2024), and features a high share of service sectors and the manufacturing sector. Research by the Duits-Nederlandse Handelskamer (German-Dutch Chamber of Commerce, DNHK) shows that more than 2,000 Dutch subsidiaries have established a presence in North Rhine-Westphalia (DNHK, 2024).

The US was the second main destination for subsidiaries of Dutch-owned multinationals. The US also saw a rise in this number from 2,115 in 2021 to 2,270 in 2022. Despite the fact that the number of Dutch-controlled subsidiaries in Belgium dropped by 2% from 2021 to 2022, the country still ranked third with 2,205 subsidiaries. Poland may have ranked fifth, but it also had the sharpest increase in the number of subsidiaries, at 27%. Its relatively highly educated population and low wages in the country make Poland attractive to Dutch-owned multinationals. Dutch-owned multinationals invest in Poland for a variety of reasons, including the set-up of shared service centres, transport companies, IT companies or production facilities (Government of the Netherlands, 2022). Figure 5.4.1 also gives an overview of the number of subsidiaries in three areas embroiled in conflict. On 24 February 2022, Russia invaded neighbouring country Ukraine, which could account for the decline in the number of Dutch subsidiaries in Russia. While there were still 200 Dutch subsidiaries in Russia in 2021, this number dropped to 155 in 2022. Even though Ukraine was also a high-risk area for Dutch enterprises due to the war, the number of subsidiaries actually rose from 115 in 2021 to 130 in 2022. Israel was also included in Figure 5.4.1 due to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The situation in the region escalated on 7 October 2023, but the conflict in Gaza has been ongoing for years (Government of the Netherlands 2024). This also poses risks for investors in the country. Before the conflict escalated in 2023, the number of subsidiaries in Israel had fallen in 2022 by a quarter to 30 subsidiaries compared to 2021.

Highest share of employed persons at Dutch subsidiaries in the US

With 420 thousand employees in absolute numbers, the majority of employees working for Dutch subsidiaries worked in the US in 2022. That number remained constant compared to the previous year. Although the US is not a uniform market and there are also marked cultural differences between the US and the Netherlands, the US is an attractive country for Dutch-owned multinationals owing to the largest technical ecosystem in the world (RVO, 2023). Dutch subsidiaries operating in trade in the US accounted for 69% of all employment at Dutch-owned multinationals in that country.

Both Germany and Italy experienced an increase in the number of employed persons from 2021 to 2022, of 3% and 17% respectively. Most employees of Dutch subsidiaries in Germany worked in the manufacturing sector, followed by the trade sector. Dutch subsidiaries in Italy also generated the most employment in the trade sector. The sharpest decline in terms of absolute employment was seen in the UK, where the number of employed persons declined from 120 thousand in 2021 to 100 thousand in 2022.

Although the number of Dutch subsidiaries in Ukraine increased in 2022, unlike the number of Dutch subsidiaries in Russia, the numbers of employed persons dropped for both countries from 2021 to 2022. On average, most people per enterprise worked for Dutch subsidiaries in Ukraine. In 2022, this was an average of 615 persons per enterprise. The relatively high average number of persons working for Dutch subsidiaries in Ukraine was mainly due to enterprises active in the mining and quarrying sector and the manufacturing sector. On average, the fewest people per Dutch subsidiary worked in Belgium, which was 43. Big differences in the average number of employees per enterprise between countries are mainly the result of differences in (labour-intensive) sectors in which the subsidiaries operate.

Most turnover per FTE at Dutch-owned multinationals in the US

Figure 5.4.3 shows the turnover per full-time equivalent (FTE) of Dutch-owned multinationals abroad. Subsidiaries of Dutch-owned multinationals in the US have the highest turnover per FTE. This turnover increased from 2021 to 2022 from €592 thousand to only €605 thousand per FTE. Germany and France topped the list of highest turnover per FTE in 2022 with €475.9 thousand and €441.7 thousand turnover per FTE respectively. Subsidiaries of Dutch-owned multinationals in Ukraine had the lowest turnover per FTE in 2022 with €63.7 thousand, followed by Israel with €162 thousand per FTE and Poland with €176.1 thousand per FTE.

While, from 2021 to 2022, Poland and Belgium recorded the strongest increase in turnover per FTE with 19% and 14% respectively, the steepest declines were seen in areas where conflicts are occurring. The turnover per FTE in Ukraine fell by the most, at 34% from 2021 to 2022, followed by Israel with a 26% drop and Russia with a decline of 24%. The decrease in the turnover per FTE in conflict areas is not entirely surprising and has many explanations. In the short term, issues such as the destruction of buildings and power infrastructure, internet disruptions and labour shortages play a role, caused by factors such as the movement of civilians into the military or to other countries, and material shortages. All of this may result in lower productivity at subsidiaries in those regions (Égert & Maisonneuve, 2023; Gorodnichenko et al., 2022). However, there is also the risks of a long-term decline in labour productivity, for example, due to a decline in the levels of education and skills of potential or current employees caused by interruptions to training programmes.

5.5 References



Arnold, J. M., & Javorcik, B. S. (2009). . Journal of International Economics, 79(1), 42–53.

Bijlsma, M., Beijerbergen, D., Berkenbos, A., Klaaijsen, E., Koymans, M., & Minderhoud, P. (2024). . De Nederlandsche Bank (the Dutch central bank, DNB).

Boghean, C., & State, M. (2015). . Procedia Economics and Finance, 32, 278–285.

Chaney, T. (2013). . National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 19170.

DNB (2024, 25 March). De Nederlandsche Bank (The Dutch Central Bank. DNB). Accessed on 23 May 2024.

DNHK (2024). [Germany as a business location]. Duits-Nederlandse Handelskamer. Accessed on 7 May 2024.

Égert, B., & Maisonneuve, de la, C. (2023, 26 October). . Accessed on 6 May 2024.

Federal Department of Finance (2024). . Federal Department of Finance. Accessed on 29 May 2024.

The French Embassy in The Hague (2022). [Economic affairs]. Ambassade de France aux Pays-Bas. Accessed on 29 May 2024.

Gorodnichenko, Y., Kudlyak, M., & Şahin, A. (2022). . Institute of Labor Economics IZA Policy Paper No. 185.

Haga, J., Huhtamäki, F., & Sundvik, D. (2022). . Global Finance Journal, 53, 100622.

ILO (2024). . International Labour Organization. Accessed on 26 June 2024.

Javorcik, B. (2015, 17 July). . Worldbank. Accessed on 6 May 2024.

Melitz, M. J. (2003). . Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

PwC (2022). . PwC. Accessed on 6 May 2024.

PwC (2024a). . PricewaterhouseCoopers. Accessed on 29 May 2024.

PwC (2024b). . PricewaterhouseCoopers. Accessed on 29 May 2024.

Government of the Netherlands (2022, 3 May). [Strong growth potential]. Government of the Netherlands. Accessed on 7 May 2024.

Government of the Netherlands (2024). [Israel and the Palestinian areas]. Government of the Netherlands. Accessed on 10 June 2024.

RVO (2023). [Starting a company in the US]. Netherlands Enterprise Agency. Accessed on 7 May 2024.





Noten

The total (non-financial) business economy comprises sections B up to and including N, excluding K and including S95 of the SBI 2008.

Self-employed persons are defined as all enterprises without employees whose legal form is sole proprietorship, in which the self-employed person is not considered to be an employee.

Figures of Dutch-owned multinationals abroad from section 5.4 are based on the OFATS statistics, in which only the turnover per foreign subsidiary is known. For comparative purposes, the choice was thus made to proceed from a labour productivity measure based on turnover per FTE for the entire chapter as opposed to value added per FTE.

The values of goods in this chapter refer to import and export values including re-exports and excluding transit trade.

FRIBS (Framework Regulation Integrating Business Statistics) is a new mandatory framework for European business statistics, which means that the OFATS figures in this section do not refer to the regular business economy, but to the standard business classification, sectors B-S, excl. O.Dutch earnings from exports

Authors: Leen Prenen, Janneke Rooyakkers, Tom Notten

The Dutch economy is deeply intertwined with the international economy. In 2022, earnings from exports of goods and services accounted for more than 35% of Dutch GDP, and nearly a third of total employment in the Netherlands could be attributed to exports that year. The export value was substantially higher in 2022 than a year before amid significant price increases that hallmarked that year. Export volumes experienced a more modest growth. As a result of the increase in prices of commodities needed to realise exports, earnings from exports are coming under increasing pressure, especially those of goods. This chapter explores export earnings and employment generated by exports of goods and services in 2022, and how these have developed since previous years. It distinguishes between earnings from different types of exports, destination countries, products and sectors and industries. Finally, this chapter looks at how employment relates to exports and the hours worked for exports. It distinguishes between occupation, employment status, level of education and sex.

6.1 Key findings

Contribution of exports to GDP

The export of Dutch goods and services amounted to €899bn in 2022 , an increase of about 23% compared to 2021. This growth was largely due to price changes; in terms of volume, exports were about 5% higher than the previous year. Domestically produced exports of goods increased by 2%, re-exports grew by 25%, and service exports by 19%.

Earnings from exports were €337bn in 2022, nearly 17% more than the previous year. Added value from service exports increased the most (up by 19%), while earnings from domestic exports increased by 16%, and earnings from re-exports by 9%.

Export earnings per euro of gross exports averaged 37 euro cents in 2022, slightly lower than in previous years. This decline was caused by domestic exports (down from 55 cents in 2021 to 53 cents in 2022) and re-exports (down from 12 cents to 11 cents). Service exports still yielded 65 cents per euro of gross exports, unchanged from 2021.

In 2022, 35.1% of Dutch GDP was earned from goods and services exports, 1.9 percentage points more than in 2021. This was mainly due to domestic exports (particularly machinery and equipment, and natural gas) and the export of services (notably air and sea transport and travel).

GDP grew by 4.3% in 2022 compared to 2021. Service exports were largely responsible for this growth, contributing 1.6 percentage points, while domestic exports and re-exports contributed 0.1 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively.

Sectors with significant earnings from exports include the industrial sector, business services and trade. In particular, manufacturing, transportation and storage, and mining and quarrying sectors saw their export earnings increase in 2022 compared to 2021. Within the industrial sector, earnings from machinery and equipment and petroleum increased significantly in 2022.

The mining and quarrying and oil-refining industries experienced significant price increases along with a decline in gross export volume. The export volume of the chemical sector also declined. The metals and building materials sectors saw high price increases accompanied by an increase in export volume. The export volume of the pharmaceutical, machinery and equipment, and food-processing industries increased.

Looking at specific categories of domestic exports, specialist machinery and equipment, natural gas, petroleum products, transport equipment, flowers and plants, and fruits and vegetables generate relatively high earnings for the Netherlands.

In terms of export destinations, the Netherlands earns the most from exports to Germany, the UK, Belgium, France, and the US. China was the only country in the Netherlands’ top 10 export markets where export earnings did not grow in 2022.

Earnings from exports to Russia have almost halved due to the sanctions imposed following the war with Ukraine.

Employment related to exports

31.4% of employment (or 2.6 million full-time equivalent jobs) in the Netherlands is related to exports. This includes 1.1 million direct jobs and 1.5 million indirect jobs (FTE).

Of the employment generated by exports, 45% is attributable to exports of domestically produced goods, 42% to service exports, and 12% to re-exports.

Business services and trade generate relatively high indirect employment due to exports, while in the industrial sector, many jobs are directly dependent on exports.

Export-induced employment can be further broken down by export destination. Exports to Germany generate the most jobs, followed by exports to the UK, Belgium and the US.

The most working hours attributable to exports are worked by those in business and administrative jobs, followed by those in technical and commercial jobs. The largest share of hours worked on exports in relative terms is in agricultural jobs (57 percent of all hours worked). This share is also relatively high in transportation and logistics jobs and ICT jobs.

Men, people with a lower level of education, and self-employed persons spend more hours on export-related work, in relative terms.

Outline

Section 6.2 covers the exports of 2022 and their earnings. We discuss the gross export value, export earnings, the composition of GDP and the contribution of exports to GDP growth in 2022, as well as the role of different export flows (domestic exports, re-exports and services exports). We then proceed by breaking down these earnings by sectors and industries, products and countries. Section 6.3 highlights export-induced employment, where we not only distinguish between direct and indirect employment, we also breakdown employment by different types of export. This is followed by a further breakdown of employment by sectors and industries and countries. Finally, this section covers the hours worked by the Dutch labour force, with a split by hours worked for exports and hours worked for domestic expenditure based on occupation, employment status, sex and level of education.

6.2 Contribution of exports to GDP

In 2022, the Netherlands exported €898.7bn worth of goods and services. As such, the export value was significantly higher than in 2021: almost 23% more goods and services were exported. This increase was mainly due to the significant price increases that characterised 2022. In 2022, consumer goods and services, for example, were 10% up on a year earlier (CBS, 2024b); producer prices of manufactured products were up by as much as 28% (CBS, 2024c). Those price increases were also reflected in the gross value of trade for 2022, within which all export flows increased by a similar percentage (see Figure 6.2.1).

The total value of Dutch exports can be subdivided into services exports and exports of goods. For goods exports, we further differentiate between domestic exports and re-exports. Re-exports consist of goods that are imported by Dutch enterprises which are then re-exported with hardly any processing on Dutch territory. Re-exported goods are temporarily owned by a Dutch enterprise while they are in the Netherlands.

Exports of goods amounted to €695bn in 2022, of which domestic goods accounted for €314bn and re-exports for €381bn. The service exports were worth €204bn. Goods exports increased by 24% relative to 2021, whereby, at 25%, re-exports rose somewhat more sharply in terms of value than domestic exports, which grew by 23%. Finally, services exports increased by 19%.

Growth in goods exports was mainly due to higher prices, growth in services exports mainly due to higher volumes

The huge increase in export value in 2022 was caused mainly by higher export prices. In 2022, the prices of exported goods and services climbed by more than 17%, while the volume of exports rose by almost 5% (see table 6.2.2). Goods exports reported the highest increase in prices, at 21%. The volume of goods exports increased by 2%, compared to 10% in 2021. The large volume increase in 2021 related to the recovery of supply chains in the wake of the coronavirus crisis, and to supply and demand becoming better balanced. The value of service exports rose by 19% in 2022, which was mainly attributable to an increase in export volume. The volume of services exports increased by nearly 12%, while prices increased by an average of 7%. The relatively high growth in volume of service exports can best be explained by the growth in travel services and in aviation and maritime transport. The exports of domestic goods were under pressure from significant price increases, particularly in the mining and quarrying sector, the oil-refining industry, the chemicals industry and metal industry, and, with a change in value and price of 23% each, they did not record any change in volume in 2022 compared with 2021. Table 6.2.8 further elaborates on the changes in value, volume and prices of domestic exports by sector and industry.

Export earnings in 2022

Dutch earnings from exports depend on the goods and services imported needed in order to produce those exports. By subtracting those imports from the export value, we can calculate export earnings, or value added. In 2022, total earnings from Dutch exports of goods and services amounted to €336.6bn: 16.5% more than in 2021. This is less than the growth in gross export value (+23%). Particularly the sharp rise in import prices for energy and raw materials used to produce exports in all types of industry led to lower export earnings per euro in terms of export value (CBS, 2024d).

The export of domestic goods yielded the most revenue at €165bn. This is 17% of GDP. This export flow is increasing steadily, following a decline in 2020, when earnings barely exceeded €121bn, or, in other words 15% of GDP. The decline in natural gas exports were a major factor in this trend (CBS, 2021). Compared to 2021, the value added in domestic exports increased by 16%. Earnings from re-exports rose by almost 9%. In 2022, the service exports earned the Dutch economy €130bn, and re-exports added a further €41bn to that total. Earnings from service exports enjoyed the strongest growth, up by over 19% compared with 2021. The rise in services exports was mainly attributable to travel services and travel-related services such as accommodation and food services, travel agencies and transport services.

In terms of earnings from exports in 2022, service exports thus rose in line with the growth in gross exports, with both rising by 19%. By contrast, re-exports showed a major discrepancy: gross export value increased by 25%, while services only increased by about 9% compared to 2021. For domestic exports the figures were 23% and 16%, respectively. The differences in the trends between goods and services may be linked to higher prices for imports, which brought down earnings. Services exports, by contrast, usually require fewer imports.

Export earnings per euro of gross exports fell in 2022

Overall, export earnings per euro of gross exports by enterprises in the Netherlands averaged 37 eurocents in 2022. However, there are substantial differences in the earnings per type of exports, as presented in Figure 6.2.3. Services exports yielded almost 64 eurocents per euro, domestic exports yielded nearly 53 eurocents, and re-exports yielded no more than eleven eurocents. As outlined earlier, this is due to the amount of imports needed to produce these exports. Compared to 2021, earnings per euro from domestic exports are thus three eurocents lower; for re-exports they were one eurocent lower. The relative earnings from Dutch service exports were at the same level in 2022 as they were in 2021. The sectors and industries with lower earnings per euro in exports than in 2021 are the transportation and storage sector, trade, the food processing and chemical industries. In the mining and quarrying sector, the agricultural, electro-technical and oil-refining industries, earnings per euro in exports in 2022 were actually higher than in 2021.

Exports became a more important contributor to Dutch GDP in 2022

Dutch GDP is composed of earnings from domestic expenditure and from the export of goods and services. Even though the share of earnings per euro from exports decreased, in total these earnings made a more important contribution to Dutch GDP in 2022. The value added to GDP due to exports of goods and services was 35.1% in 2022, compared with 33.2% in 2021. The largest contribution came from domestic exports, at 17.2%, followed by the services exports, at 13.6%, and re-exports at 4.3%.

The reason why exports became much more important for the Dutch economy was mainly the increased earnings from service exports and domestic exports. Earnings from machinery and equipment and natural gas in particular rose sharply in 2022 compared to 2021 (CBS, 2024d). In services, travel services and aviation and maritime transport, in particular, picked up again following the lockdowns and restrictions around the world in response to the coronavirus pandemic.

Services exports main contributor to GDP growth thanks to 2022 exports

Dutch GDP grew by 4.3% in 2022, with domestic expenditure accounting for 2.4 percentage points, and exports of goods and services accounting for 1.9 percentage points (see Figure 6.2.4). At 1.6 percentage points, service exports were a key contributor to GDP growth in 2022, with domestic exports and re-exports adding 0.1 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively.

Figure 6.2.3 shows that earnings from goods exports were lower on average in 2022 than in 2021. Both domestic exports and re-exports yielded less per euro in 2022 than in the previous year, reflecting the lower contribution to GDP growth. Moreover, goods exports suffered to a large extent from the higher prices of raw materials and intermediate products, a factor that affected the production of services less. Service exports also had further to catch up in 2022: in 2021, the trade in services had not yet fully recovered from the coronavirus crisis, given that there were still travel and other restrictions in place in that year, for instance. This meant that goods exports contributed more to GDP growth. In light of the sharp rise in export earnings in 2022, the trade in services appears to have recovered from the coronavirus crisis and is now making a relatively large contribution to GDP growth.

More than three-quarters of value added in manufacturing due to exports

There are significant differences in earnings from domestic or foreign sources (see table 6.2.5). Export earnings include both the earnings from an industry’s direct exports and earnings generated by supplying exporting industries.

The public sector, which comprises administration, education and health care, adds by far the most value to domestic expenditure, with 98% of value added originating from the domestic market. At 85%, domestic expenditure also serves as the main source of earnings for financial services and renting, buying and selling real estate. Similarly, industries such as construction, accommodation and food and culture and recreation also focus mainly on the domestic market.

In terms of trade, exports in business services and the information and communications sector account for half of total earnings in that industry. In the manufacturing sector, transportation and storage sector, agriculture and the mining and quarrying sector, this share is even higher.

Figure 6.2.6 further highlights the sectors and industries that depend on the exports of goods and services for at least half of their total earnings. It also breaks down earnings from exports even further, by types of export, and compares these to earnings from exports in 2021.

As Figure 6.2.6 shows, the value added by exports increased for all sectors and industries, and for all types of exports. Manufacturing, transportation and storage and mining and quarrying showed the most substantial growth. Growth in the mining and quarrying sector was largely due to higher prices for mineral fuels. The other figures indicating growth may also relate to higher prices. Table 6.2.8 distinguishes between the trends in terms of price and volume. Significant growth is evident in domestic exports, particularly in the manufacturing sector and the mining and quarrying sector, and in services exports, mainly concerning enterprises operating in the area of transportation and storage and again manufacturing.

Figure 6.2.7 subdivides the value added of the manufacturing sector into more specific industries. Within manufacturing, the machinery industry earned the most from exports, especially from domestic exports. Export earnings in this industry increased substantially by 17% in 2022, compared to 2021 and have more than doubled since 2015. Exports of semiconductor-manufacturing equipment, which mainly go to China, Taiwan and South Korea, rose considerably in this period for instance (CBS, 2024e). Other top export earners include the food-processing industry and the chemical industry, and the former also generated relatively high earnings from domestic expenditure. The value added by exports from those two industries in 2022 increased by 6% and 8%, respectively, compared to 2021.

Earnings in the oil-refining industry were five times higher in 2022 than in 2021. That large increase was due to higher prices and scarcity as a consequence of the war in Ukraine and the sanctions imposed on Russia. Given the increase in earnings in major industries within the manufacturing sector, value added increased across the sector as a whole. However, not all industries saw their earnings from exports increase in 2022. Some smaller industries, such as the automotive industry, other transport equipment industry and the textile industry saw their earnings from exports decline in 2022.

Increase in export value of industries mainly due to higher prices

The first part of this section shows that gross export value and associated earnings rose considerably in 2022. In order to interpret this growth in value properly, it is important to know how much can be attributed to price increases. This enables us to identify the trend in volumes in a more detailed manner. The price-adjusted value, also known as the volume trend, best reflects how trade actually developed in various industries.

Table 6.2.8 shows the changes in value, volumes and prices of exports in 2022 relative to 2021, broken down by sector and industry. This only involves domestic exports. One thing that immediately stands out is the large price increase of the mining and quarrying sector and the oil-refining industry, caused by more expensive mineral fuels. However, this large jump in value actually masks a drop in volumes because of significantly higher prices.

While the metal industry and the building materials industry also saw major price increases, they saw an increase in domestic exports compared with 2021. Another observation is the substantial rise in volumes of the pharmaceutical industry in 2022, as well as the machinery industry, which also stood out in Figure 6.2.7 based on export value. The food-processing industry, also a major export industry, saw a small rise in volume terms, while the chemicals industry exported a lower volume of domestic exports in 2022 than in 2021. Finally, the ‘other’ category, which includes small-scale crafts, hand-made goods and other goods made and sold to foreign markets by individuals, enjoyed a very large increase in value in relative terms. However, the export value of this category was limited in absolute terms, meaning that a relatively modest increase resulted in an impressive growth figure.

Exports of specialised machinery generated most earnings in 2022

Figure 6.2.9 lists the top 15 types of goods in terms of value added through domestic exports in 2022. The value added is shown as part of the total export value, showing us that petroleum in particular generates relatively little added value relative to total export value. The reason for this is as follows: the Netherlands hardly extracts any crude oil on Dutch territory and therefore has to import almost all of it; the imported crude oil is then processed in the Netherlands. Natural gas, on the other hand, results in higher earnings because it is extracted on Dutch territory, and exports of natural gas therefore require few imports, if any.

Specialised machinery ranks first by some margin when it comes to earnings from domestic exports. This includes machinery for semiconductor production, agricultural machinery, medical equipment and devices and food processing equipment. Earnings from the export of specialised machinery comprise about 64% of gross export value. Earnings from the export of domestically produced raw animal and plant-based products (mainly flowers and plants) also rank relatively high in fifth place, with earnings making up 72% of the total export value in this category.

Earnings from all export destinations increasing, except for Russia and China

Figure 6.2.10 shows the export destinations with the highest export earnings in 2022. These are the same ten countries as the year before; however, there have been a few shifts within the top ten. For example, earnings from exports to France just surpassed those to the US; these two countries switched placed compared with 2021. This was due to a slight drop in earnings from service exports to the US. Also, Switzerland overtook Italy in terms of export earnings, mainly due to a significant increase of earnings from service exports to Switzerland.

Overall, all countries registered robust growth in export earnings between 2021 and 2022. This is also likely to be the result of higher prices in 2022, which meant that earnings increased in absolute terms. China and Russia were exceptions, however. Earnings from exports to Russia almost halved in 2022 compared to 2021. The war in Ukraine led to a ban on exports of machinery and technology to Russia, as well as luxury goods such as cars, yachts, jewellery and clothing. Partly because of this, earnings from service exports fell by 48%, earnings from domestic exports fell by 42%, and earnings from re-exports fell by 30% (CBS, 2023a). As for the rest, earnings from exports to countries close to Russia, such as Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Turkey, did increase in 2022. This could be linked to the circumvention of trade sanctions on Russia via those countries (CBS, 2023b; Motké, 2022).

Earnings from exports to China were more or less unchanged in 2022. In terms of goods exports to China, in 2022, the Netherlands earned the most from machinery and equipment, particularly specialised machinery, followed by food products, such as baby milk powder, as well as meat. In 2022, the top climbers were food products, machinery and equipment and semiconductors. The biggest decline in export earnings from exports to China was in pharmaceuticals and passenger cars. While earnings from domestic exports to China rose between 2021 and 2022, earnings from re-exports remained the same and earnings from services exports fell by a quarter. This was mainly due to a downturn in earnings from royalties (CBS, 2023c).

Germany remains the most important export destination by far, accounting for 19% of total earnings from exports. Approximately three-quarters of these earnings come from German domestic expenditure; the remaining quarter come from exports that are further processed in Germany, which are then exported again (CBS, 2023d). Exports to the UK and Belgium each account for around 9% of total export earnings; France and the US come next with almost 7% each.

6.3 Export-induced employment

Nearly a third of employment in the Netherlands is linked to exports

Exports are not only important to the Dutch economy in terms of value added, but they also create jobs. This primarily concerns direct employment – people who work for enterprises that manufacture products destined for the export market. Additionally, the export of goods and services generates significant indirect employment. Enterprises involved in exports usually need suppliers and other service providers for their business operations, involving items such as accounting software, transportation of goods abroad, and intermediate goods for the production process. Enterprises that provide services or supply goods to the exporting enterprise thus generate value added and employment. Jobs in enterprises that do not engage in export activities, but which do supply to enterprises that export, comprise indirect export-induced employment.

In 2022, nearly 2.6 million jobs (FTE) jobs were linked to exports of goods and services. Of those, over 1.1 million were directly related to exports and over 1.5 million were indirectly related to exports. That amounts to 31.4% of total employment in the Netherlands. This meant that sales in markets abroad were more significant in 2022 than in 2021, when exports accounted for 30.7% of total employment in the Netherlands. The growth of jobs linked to exports in total employment (at +0.7 percentage points) was lower than the growth of export earnings within Dutch GDP (at +1.9 percentage points). Income generated from exports of domestically produced goods and services mainly resulted in higher profits for exporting enterprises, with no corresponding increase in wages. This is also one of the findings of the analysis by Hebbink and Öztürk (2023).

Domestic exports create the most jobs

Export-induced employment is closely intertwined with the value added generated by these exports, as Figure 6.3.2 shows. It also shows the sectors and industries that earn at least half of their value added from exports. In this context, it is clear that earnings do not always match employment. For example, the share of mining and quarrying in total value added due to exports greatly exceeds the employment that it generates; in 2022, mineral fuels yielded significant value added although relatively few jobs were involved in this. Manufacturing, too, generates considerable value added with relatively few workers. Business services, on the other hand, creates more employment opportunities than value added, in relative terms. This is probably because the production of services is more labour-intensive than goods manufacturing, which requires more capital.

Most export-induced employment in business services

Figure 6.3.3 shows the employment in those same sectors and industries by type of exports and by type of employment. The export of goods and services creates the most jobs in business services, especially in services exports. It appears to involve a high number of indirect employment opportunities – such as services that exporting enterprises use for their business operations, like accounting, marketing and legal services. By contrast, manufacturing has a relatively large number of jobs that are directly related to exports, particularly when it comes to domestic exports. In turn, trade provides relatively large numbers of indirect export-induced jobs – such as transport enterprises that ship goods abroad for exporting enterprises, or wholesale distributors which purchase goods from a manufacturer and then export these to foreign countries.

Exports to Germany create the most jobs

Figure 6.3.4 shows a breakdown of export-induced employment by destination. Unsurprisingly, employment linked to exports broken down by country closely matches the countries that the Netherlands generates most export earnings from: Germany, the UK and Belgium make up the top three. A quarter of total employment created through re-exports comes from Germany, 11% from Belgium and 10% from France. The top destinations in terms of employment attributable to services exports are Germany, comprising 15% of total employment created through service exports, the UK, totalling 12%, and the US, adding 9% to employment linked to services exports. The most important countries in terms of employment created through domestic exports are, once again, Germany with 18%, the UK with 8% and Belgium with 9%.

Most hours worked in business and administrative occupations

Not only do we know how many FTEs in the Netherlands worked on exports, we also know who worked those hours. To arrive at that data, we linked data on exports by sector and industry to information on personal characteristics. This enabled us to identify export-induced employment broken down by sex, occupation, level of education and employment status. Even though these personal characteristics are based on hours worked as opposed to FTE positions, the interpretation nevertheless remains the same.

Nearly 31% of the total hours worked by the Dutch labour force are attributable to exports. In total, this adds up to around 94 million hours per week. Figure 6.3.5 shows a breakdown of these hours by type of occupation. As with value added and employment, the share for the purpose of exports and for the purpose of domestic expenditure differs widely by occupation. A majority of the hours worked in agricultural jobs, an industry with a relatively high share of exports in total turnover, are spent on activities to produce or enable exports (57%). At 51%, transport and logistics-related jobs as well as jobs in ICT, with 45% of the total hours worked, also spend a relatively high share of working hours on activities that enable the export of goods and services.

Jobs in education and health care and jobs in public administration involve relatively few hours contributing to exports. This makes sense as these industries are relatively domestically oriented.

Self-employed persons and men work relatively the most hours for exports

Figure 6.3.6 splits the hours worked for exports and for domestic expenditure by employment status and by sex. On average, men appear to work a higher proportion of their hours for exports. This is mainly due to the fact that they work in sectors and industries with a greater focus on exports, such as manufacturing and transportation than women, who more often work in health care and education. Self-employed persons spend relatively the most hours worked for exports; men work 40% of their hours for exports and women spend 30% of hours worked for exports.

Workers with lower level of education spend relatively the most hours working for exports

The hours worked by the Dutch labour force can be broken down further. Figure 6.3.7 shows the differentiation by level of education and sex. Workers with a lower level of education spend the most hours working for exports in relative terms: approximately 41% of hours for men and 26% of hours for women. Together, this group works over 17 million hours per week for exports. The fact that the share of export-related work is highest among workers with a lower level of education is due to the kind of jobs involved (such as technical jobs or jobs in transportation). It also reflects the sectors and industries that are involved in exports, which are more likely to employ workers with a lower level of education. Manufacturing and transportation derive a relatively large share of their earnings from exports, for example.

6.4 References



CBS (2021, 5 November). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2023a, 31 October). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2023b, 6 November). . Statistics Netherlands Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2023c, 27 October). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2023d, 12 October). Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2024a). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2014.

CBS (2024b). . [Dataset]. Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2024c). . [Dataset]. Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2024d, 19 March). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

CBS (2024e, 21 February). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 7 June 2024.

Hebbink, G., & Öztürk, B. (2023). . De Nederlandsche Bank (the Dutch central bank; DNB).

Kranendonk, H., & Verbruggen, J. (2008). . The Economist, 156(3), 295–306.

Motké, S. (2022, 27 September). [Sanctions against Russia easy to bypass]. Het Financieele Dagblad. Accessed on 7 June 2024.





Noten

The analysis in this chapter requires data from the National Accounts. At the time of writing, 2022 is the most recent full year for which data are available in the National Accounts. The other chapters on international trade in goods (chapters 2 and 3) and services (chapter 4) make use of the source statistics on international trade in goods and international trade in services, respectively, and as a result describe 2023 (and, in the case of chapter 2, the first quarter of 2024).

The figures presented in this chapter are based on figures of the National Accounts. The ownership criterion is central in the National Accounts, which means certain transactions abroad are classified as Dutch imports and exports even if these traded goods have not physically entered the Netherlands. Partly because of this, the figures in this chapter and in Chapter 7 differ from those reported in Chapters 2, 3 and 4, which focus on the principle of border crossing. For more information about the different concepts within statistics on the international trade in goods, see CBS (2024a).

Two methods were used to determine the contribution of expenditure categories to GDP. The traditional method subtracts total imports from total exports resulting in an underestimation of the contribution of exports to GDP. Consumer expenditure and investment namely also make use of (intermediate) imports. The method of Kranendonk and Verbruggen (2008) applied here attributes (intermediate) imports to all final expenditure categories. This removes the underestimate of the contribution of exports to GDP.

According to the SITC classification at two digits.

The lower education level includes primary education, prevocational secondary education (VMBO), the first three years of senior general secondary education (HAVO)/pre-university education (VWO) and lower secondary vocational training (entry level), formerly assistant’s training (MBO-1). The medium education level includes upper secondary education (HAVO/VWO), basic vocational training (MBO-2), vocational training (MBO-3), and middle management and specialist education (MBO-4). Higher education comprises higher vocational education (HBO) or university education (WO). Higher vocational education (HBO) and university education (WO) programmes include all first degree, bachelor’s and doctoral or master’s programmes as well as doctorates.Use of imports in the Dutch economy

Authors: Timon Bohn, Robin Konietzny, Tom Notten

The Dutch economy is closely connected to other countries because it operates as part of global value chains. The Netherlands is a major hub for global trade due to its integration with intraregional trade in the European single market. Dutch enterprises process imported goods into intermediate and final products which are then often re-exported. This chapter takes a closer look at the origin and composition of Dutch import flows in 2022. How are these imports of goods and services used within the Dutch economy? Do Dutch enterprises use them in domestic production or do they leave the country again as re-exports without further processing? Dutch enterprises typically import goods and services which are more efficient to produce abroad or which they cannot produce themselves. A significant proportion of these goods and services determine the Netherland’s competitiveness in the world market.

7.1 Key findings

How imports are used

The infographic at the beginning of this chapter shows what happens to imports after they have entered the Netherlands. In 2022, the Netherlands imported a record €795.2bn worth of goods and services from other countries, of which €621.3bn was related to goods and €173.9bn to services.

In 2022, a substantial proportion of total goods and services imports (41%) was sent directly abroad in the form of re-exports. The vast majority of these re-exports involved goods. Imports of goods and services destined directly for domestic consumption account for 10% and 3% of total imports, respectively. Imports of intermediate goods and services used by Dutch enterprises for the production of goods and the rendering of services had a share of 29% and 17%, respectively.

Compared to 2021, imports of goods and services increased by 25.4%. Goods imports saw an increase in value of 27.2%, mainly driven by a 24.9% rise in import prices; the increase in volume was a modest 1.8%. In 2022, the value of services imports rose by €28bn or 19.2%, due to increases in import volumes by 10.5% and import prices by 7.8%.

Composition and origin of goods imports

More than half of all goods imports (€312.6bn) were destined for re-export in 2022, and this share has been on the rise in recent years. Goods imports destined for direct domestic consumption had a value of €78.4bn in 2022. Intermediate goods imports amounted to €230.3bn in 2021: 34% of these were processed by Dutch firms to produce goods or services that were sold on the domestic market and 66% were exported after processing in the Netherlands.

In 2022, crude oil and petroleum products was the most important category of goods imported for re-export. Crude oil and petroleum products was also the largest category of intermediate goods imports: 80% of goods in this category were processed into goods or services destined for export. Road vehicles, natural gas and clothing dominated the imports of goods for direct domestic consumption.

Imported goods destined for re-export came mainly from Germany and China in 2022. Germany and Belgium were the main import partners for intermediate goods imports and imports intended for direct domestic consumption.

In 2022, the oil-refining and chemical industries experienced explosive growth in the intermediate import value due to the global rise in energy prices, which translated into steep increases in import prices. The electronics and transport equipment industries, on the other hand, recorded a drop in intermediate imports in 2021 and 2022. Import volumes fell, which can partially be explained by the worldwide shortages of semiconductors.

Composition and origin of services imports

Services imports destined for direct domestic consumption had a total value of €27.2bn in 2022. Intermediate services imports amounted to €137.3bn in 2022, 35% of which were further processed by Dutch firms into goods or services that were sold on the domestic market, while 65% were exported abroad after processing in the Netherlands.

Business services was the largest category of intermediate services imports, with 57% being further processed into exported goods or services. Services imports destined for direct domestic consumption amounted to 15.1bn in travel services, €4.9bn in ICT services and €4.3bn in business services.

With respect to intermediate services imports, the US and the UK were the most important import partners. Services intended for domestic consumption came mainly from Germany and the US.

The importance of imports to Dutch exports

In the period between 2019 and 2022, the Dutch economy earned less value added per euro from domestic exports, as more imports were used to produce those exports. This was mainly caused by higher prices for imported goods. The prices paid for imported goods used to produce exports increased by 57% in the period between 2019 and 2022, while the increase in export prices was lower at 33%. This increase was mainly at the expense of the share of services imports processed into exports. The share of processed services imports decreased more than the share of value added or export earnings. Partly because of this, export earnings kept up fairly well. Earnings in terms of volume also surpassed export sales.

Earnings per euro of services exports actually increased in the period between 2019 and 2022, which means that the import content of services exports dropped. For services exports, the prices of the required imports did not rise as fast as the import prices required for goods exports. Between 2019 and 2022, export prices of services increased by 10.9%, while import prices of goods and services embodied in services imports rose by 15%.

International linkages through Dutch imports and exports

The Netherlands is as a major hub in intraregional trade in the European single market. A large proportion of the imports that are processed into exports (to the value of €50.4bn and representing 22.7% of total imports for the purpose of intermediate consumption) came from the EU-27 and were subsequently exported to the EU-27 again. This share was 0.5 percentage points lower than in 2021, despite the fact that the value of these imports was almost €10bn higher. A lot of trade still takes place within the EU, but noticeably less than before the UK exited the EU.

Apart from Europe, with €27.2bn and €6.4bn respectively, the US and China were once again key suppliers for imports processed by Dutch enterprises.

Further analysing export-related imports

In 2022, a total of €56.8bn worth of imports of raw materials and mineral fuels and €20.3bn in industrial products were needed to produce exports.

There is a high degree of dependence on the EU-27 for imports needed for the production of exports in the areas of industrial products (69% from EU-27), food and beverages (64%) and chemical products (63%).

In 2022, a total of €25bn business services imports and €13.8bn worth of transport services imports were needed to produce exports. Domestic enterprises also paid €15.5bn worth of licences and royalties to foreign countries needed in export production.

In 2022, nearly half of the imported services came from the EU-27. Both the EU share and the shares of major export markets remained virtually unchanged compared to 2021.

Outline

Section 7.2 gives a description of the use of goods and services imports in the Netherlands in 2022. Which imports are intended for direct consumption in the Netherlands and which imports leave the country as re-exports? Which products and services are used as intermediate inputs in Dutch production? Section 7.3 provides more details on the composition and origin of goods imports, while section 7.4 does the same for the import of services. The importance of imports to Dutch exports is discussed in section 7.5. That section looks at the economic recovery of the Dutch trade after the COVID-19 pandemic, which also gave rise to an increasing import content in exports in 2022. Was the growth in monetary value of these processed imports essentially a price effect or a volume effect? Section 7.6 examines which imports from which countries are incorporated into exports for certain major trading partners. For example, did imports mainly come the EU or did they come from non-EU countries in 2022? Imports associated with exports are further analysed in section 7.7. This adds a product dimension to the analysis of imported products and services processed into Dutch exports.

7.2 The various import flows

This section describes how goods and services imported into the Netherlands in 2022 were used. What exactly happens to the goods and services that enter the Netherlands? What proportion of those imports are used in production processes in the Netherlands? And what proportion is destined for use by Dutch households (both for consumption or investment)? Which types of imports leave the Netherlands as re-exports with minimal processing? Given that 2022 was characterised by huge price increases, a breakdown between volume changes and price changes is provided where possible.

In 2022, imports of goods and services into the Netherlands reached a record value of €795bn. This represents an increase of €161bn (+25.4%) compared to 2021. Goods imports recorded the highest increase in value at €133bn (+27.2%). This was predominantly due to higher import prices. Compared to 2021, prices rose by 24.9%, while the increase in volume remained at a modest 1.8%. In 2021, the rise in goods imports by volume was 9.5%.

This large volume increase in 2021 related to baseline effects, as the Dutch economy saw temporary business closures in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. When comparing the volumes of 2022 with these exceptionally low volumes in 2020, the differences appear to be great. In 2022, the value of services imports rose by €28bn or 19.2%, pushing up import volumes by 10.5% and import prices by 7.8% (CBS, 2023). Trade in goods was able to rebound much more quickly from the COVID-19 crisis than trade in services, with travel services and tourism being affected by travel restrictions for much longer.

It should be noted that this chapter only looks at the domestic chain. This means that Dutch links only relate to direct flows between the Netherlands and partner countries, not to indirect trade through third countries.

Imports for re-exports continue to be the main trade flow

Table 7.2.1 and the infographic at the beginning of this chapter show that a considerable proportion of goods imports leave the country again as basically unprocessed re-exports. About half of goods imports were destined for re-export, and this share has increased in recent years. Figure 7.2.2 shows that approximately 46% of goods imports were destined for re-export in 2015. This share has since grown to about 50% in 2022. An example of imports for re-export are imports of vegetables from Spain which become the property of Dutch entities and are then exported again to third countries such as Belgium without any further processing. Previous research shows that a large proportion of goods imports from Asia are destined for re-export to the rest of Europe (Franssen et al., 2020). Re-exports only comprise a small proportion of total services imports. Figure 7.2.3 shows that approximately 5% of services imports were destined for re-export in 2022. Re-exported services mainly involve royalties and licences of special purpose entities registered in the Netherlands that manage intellectual property rights and transfer the payments they collect directly to foreign parent companies (Mellens, et al., 2011; CBS, 2016).

Imports of goods and services for direct consumption back to pre-pandemic levels

In addition to imports destined for re-export, goods and services imports for direct domestic consumption are not subject to any significant processing by Dutch enterprises. In 2022, the Netherlands imported €105.7bn worth of goods and services that were consumed directly by Dutch households or government organisations and enterprises in the form of investments. A bottle of wine produced and bottled in Italy is an example of an import for direct consumption by Dutch households. Imports of goods intended for direct consumption had a total value of €78.4bn in 2022, which represented an increase of €9.9bn (+14%) compared to 2021. Compared to 2019, this was 15.4% higher. Figure 7.2.2 shows that the relative share of imports of goods destined for direct consumption has declined over the years. This share was between 15% and 16% in the years 2015–2019. In 2022, the share of goods imports for direct consumption is equivalent to 13%.

Imports of services destined for direct consumption amounted to €27.2bn in 2022, which was an increase of €0.4bn (+2%) compared to 2019. Consumption by Dutch tourists abroad makes up the majority of imports in this category. This is clearly reflected in the years 2020 and 2021. In comparison with 2019, the share of services imports destined for direct consumption dropped by 11% in 2020 and 12% in 2021, which can mainly be explained by the decline in the number of Dutch tourists abroad during the COVID-19 crisis.

Intermediate imports of goods and services

Approximately 46% of imported goods and services were intended for further processing by enterprises in the Netherlands. These imports, also referred to as intermediate imports, amounted to €367.5bn in 2022. Intermediate imports can be subdivided into intermediate imports of goods (€230.3bn) and intermediate imports of services (€137.3bn). Intermediate imports are further processed by domestic enterprises into goods or services that are sold on the Dutch market or abroad. Approximately a third (€79bn) of the intermediate imports processed into goods and services in 2022 were sold on the domestic market; two-thirds (€151.3bn) were destined for foreign markets. An example of intermediate goods imports which are processed into Dutch exports are electronic components imported from Malaysia. The relative shares of processed intermediate services imports for the domestic market and the foreign market were similar, at €48.5bn and €88.7bn, respectively. Dutch enterprises in wholesale trade that hire foreign transport enterprises for land transportation are an example of intermediate services imports that are used in Dutch production processes. Intermediate imports destined to be processed into export products grew by €57.7bn in 2022, or 31.7%, compared to the pre-COVID-19 year of 2019. Sections 7.5 to 7.7 look in more detail at these import flows.

7.3 Composition and origin of goods imports

Figure 7.3.1 shows that crude oil and petroleum products again proved to be the largest category of goods imports 2022. Compared to 2021, imports of these goods increased by €38.6bn or 80.4%. This sharp rise was caused by an increase in oil prices due to the recovery in global demand for fuel. Imported crude oil and petroleum products are largely destined for re-export; however, compared to 2021, the share of imports for further processing into Dutch exports has grown. Crude oil and petroleum products also have the highest import value of any goods category imported for further processing for domestic consumption, at around €8bn. Totalling €7.4bn, natural gas and industrial gas are also important import products that are processed for domestic consumption. Goods imports in the category of electrical devices and equipment had an import value of €36.6bn, and approximately 69.7% were destined for re-export. Compared to 2021, imports of electrical devices and equipment grew by 18.1%.

Crude oil was the largest category of goods imported for re-export

The infographic at the beginning of this chapter shows that, as in 2021, imports for re-export, amounting to €312.6bn and a share of 40%, continued to represent the main import flow entering the Netherlands in 2022. As Figure 7.3.1 shows, the largest goods category within this flow comprised crude oil and petroleum products. In this category, imports for re-export amounted to €37.9bn, which represented an increase of 58.6% over 2021. This large increase is mainly explained by the effects of the war in Ukraine and the resulting price increases. Trade in natural gas also saw steep price increases. Natural gas imported for the purpose of re-exports amounted to approximately €20.5bn in 2022, which was an increase of about 260% compared to 2021. This continued a trend; natural gas imported for re-export had already tripled in 2021 compared to the year before.

Crude oil and natural gas important for both re-exports and domestic processing

Intermediate goods imports peaked at €230.3bn in 2022, which was up by €33.5bn and 35.6% on 2021. Figure 7.3.1 shows that crude oil and petroleum products and natural gas and industrial gas proved to be the largest intermediate goods import category, totalling €47.7bn and €22.7bn. Approximately 80% of the imported crude oil processed by enterprises in the Netherlands was destined for export and 20% for domestic consumption. Examples of intermediate imports of crude oil and petroleum products are crude oil that is refined into petroleum products, but also serves as a raw material for the manufacturing of plastics. Petroleum products such as marine diesel and paraffin can also be included in this category. Imports of chemical products are another product category where imports are ultimately incorporated into export products. In 2022, the import value of chemical products was €20.4bn, approximately half of which were used for export-oriented production processes.

Vehicles and clothing mainly imported for domestic consumption.

In 2022, goods imports directly destined for domestic consumption amounted to €78.4bn or 12.6% of the total goods imports. Among these imports, the largest goods category comprised road transport vehicles, with an import value of €12bn, natural gas and industrial gas, with an import value of €7.8bn and clothing and accessories with an import value amounting to €4.4bn. Together, these three categories represent 30.9% of total imports for direct consumption. More than half of imports of road transport vehicles, such as passenger cars and motor vehicles, are therefore destined directly for Dutch consumers or businesses (CBS, 2024a).

Germany continues to be the most important trading partner for goods imports

Table 7.3.2 shows the various import categories for the top Dutch import partners. As in previous years, in 2022, Germany continued to be the most important trading partner for the import of goods with an import value of €95.7bn, followed by Belgium and China. The EU-27 accounted for 43.5% of total goods imports into the Netherlands.

EU-27 provides almost half of intermediate input for Dutch production

Imports from EU countries that were used for further processing by enterprises in the Netherlands amounted to €95.5bn, which was 42.6% of total intermediate goods imports. Figure 7.3.3 shows that the share of the EU-27, which comprises Germany, Belgium and other EU member states, declined in 2021 and 2022 compared to 2020. This may be explained by price rises for crude oil and natural gas which are mainly imported from non-EU countries. As a result of these price increases, the import value from non-EU countries rose at a higher rate than the import value from EU countries, causing the share of the EU-27 countries to fall. In 2022, German imports represented around 16.0% of total goods imports, compared to 18.8% in 2021, and 19.2% in 2022. Imports from other EU member states (excluding Germany and Belgium) also dropped by around 2.3 percentage points in 2022 compared to 2021.

Intermediate goods imports can be further broken down into imports by sectors and industries. Table 7.3.4, for example, shows that the commercial services industry imported intermediate goods worth €55.8bn in 2022. Other large importers of intermediate goods include the oil-refining industry, the chemical industry and the food, beverages and tobacco industry. Columns 3–5 of table 7.3.4 show the year-on-year changes by sector and industry. The value of intermediate goods imports for the oil-refining industry fell by 33% between 2019 and 2020, only to climb again by more than 60% over two consecutive years. However, this does not necessarily mean that the import volume also changed. We further break down changes in value into changes in volume, as presented in columns 6–8, and changes in price, as shown in columns 9–11. Table 7.3.4 clearly shows that the substantive changes in value of the imports in this industry in 2021 and 2022 can largely be explained by price changes. The drop in goods imports for the electrotechnical industry, on the other hand, was mainly caused by a fall in import volume. In 2021 and 2022, this industry saw disruptions in the supply chain as a result of problems with the supply of microchips and semiconductors (Notten, 2022). The motor vehicle and trailer industry was also affected by shortages of semiconductors (CBS, 2022).

7.4 Composition and origin of services imports

This section details the use, composition and origin of Dutch services imports. In 2022, business services (such as legal services and accounting) were again the largest category of services imports, as Figure 7.4.1 shows. The Netherlands imported €51.7bn worth of business services, representing an increase of €4.1bn (+8.6%) relative to 2021. Approximately 92% of business services were imported by enterprises for further processing or to be able to provide services, such as ICT services and R&D services and fees for the use of intellectual property (Bohn et al., 2022). Of this 92%, 35 percentage points were processed for domestic consumption and 57 percentage points for the export of goods and services. Transport services were the second-largest category, with a 19.4% increase compared to 2021. At 98.1%, transport services were destined almost entirely for intermediate consumption. Royalties, such as franchises and licence fees, ranked third among the largest categories of imported services, with an import value of €22.9bn. Ranked fourth were ICT services with an import value of €19.1bn and an increase of 15.4% compared to 2021.

Table 7.4.2 shows from which countries or groups of countries services are imported and how they are used in the Dutch economy. In 2022, the US was again the largest import partner for services (€28.7bn), followed by the UK and Germany. The EU single market as a whole accounted for €82.2bn worth of imported services. Imports of services from the US rose by 5.5% relative to 2021. Germany and the group of other EU countries showed marked increases of 25.2% and 23%, respectively, compared to 2021.

Figure 7.4.3 shows the shares of various countries and regions in total intermediate services imports between 2015 and 2022. The share of EU countries in these imports accounted for 50.6% in 2022 and has been growing steadily since 2015, when their share was at 39.8%. Within ‘other EU member states’, Ireland, France and Poland are important countries of origin for services imports. The growth of EU countries was mainly at the expense of the share of ‘other European countries’, from 10.3% in 2015 to 3% in 2022. A further rise of 6.5% in 2021 to 8.9% in 2022 was seen for Asian countries, (excluding China).

When it comes to imports of services from EU countries, business services and transport services dominate with an import value of €23.0bn and €19.8bn, respectively. When it comes to imports of services from non-EU countries, business services also formed the largest category with an import value of €55.3bn. The UK and the US are the largest suppliers of business services from non-EU countries. After business services and transport services, royalties for the use of intellectual property are also a large category. In total, the Netherlands imported €22.6bn in this category, mainly from the US (€12.5bn), the UK (€1.0bn) and Germany (€0.8bn). The majority of imports of ICT services also came from the US and the UK, to the value of €2.5bn and €2.3bn respectively.

7.5 The importance of imports for Dutch exports

The previous sections have already shown that the Netherlands exports goods and services that require large quantities of goods and services imports in their production processes. Dutch production processes are characterised by a high import content of exports, an important feature in a country’s integration in international value chains.

Declining earnings per euro for domestic exports

In the period between 2019 and 2022, the Dutch economy earned less value added per euro from domestic exports, in relative terms, because export earnings failed to climb as rapidly as the gross value of these exports (CBS, 2024b). Chapter 6 already showed that the value added of earnings per euro from domestic exports was 52.7 eurocents in 2022. See Figure 6.2.3. The other 47.3 cents consisted of imported goods and services used in the production process for exports. In other words, the import content of Dutch-manufactured exports was 47.3%. In 2019, earnings per euro on the exports of domestics goods were 53.8%. In 2019, 1.1 eurocents per euro more was earned from domestic exports than in 2022. Subsequently, the import content in 2019 was also lower, at 46.2%. There is a negative relationship between export earnings and imports incorporated into exports: if earnings per euro of exports increase, the import content of exports drop and vice versa; and if earnings per euro of exports decline, the import content of exports increase.

The value of services exports did not surpass the pre-pandemic levels until 2022

Table 7.5.1 shows the value of the imports of goods and services incorporated into Dutch exports in the period from 2019 to 2022. Services exports suffered a major blow during the COVID-19 crisis and it was not until 2022 that the export value surpassed the export value of 2019. Another notable detail in table 7.5.1 is the fact that the value of the goods imports incorporated into services exports declined by 3.9% in the period 2019–2022, while the value of the services imports processed for goods exports went up by 2.1%. Therefore, the share of services imports incorporated into the services exports rose, and the share of goods imports incorporated into the exports of services fell. In the period from 2019 to 2022, earnings per euro from services exports increased by 2.6 eurocents, where the Netherlands stood to gain 63.9 eurocents per euro of services exports in 2022. This means that the import content of services exports dropped by 2.6 percentage points in the 2019–2022 period.

Significant price increases due to post-COVID-19 economic recovery and geo-political tensions

The increase in the import content can mainly be explained by price increases. In 2020, the world was struck by the COVID-19 pandemic, which triggered a global recession characterised by a fall in demand and output restrictions. This translated into falling export prices. In 2020, export prices for domestic goods slumped by 4.5% (see table 7.5.2). The year 2021 was characterised by a partial recovery in demand and by geopolitical tensions as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in early 2022. In 2021 and 2022, export prices rose by 12.9% and 23.1%, respectively, with crude oil and natural gas seeing the steepest price increases (see also tables 6.2.2 and 6.2.8 in Chapter 6 for further details). In the period from 2019 to 2022, the prices of exported goods manufactured in the Netherlands increased by 32.7%.

Prices of imports processed into exports rose more rapidly than prices of exported goods

The prices of imported goods incorporated into domestic exports, however, rose much faster, by 56.7%. This includes, for example, steep price increases for imported crude oil and natural gas. Prices of imported services incorporated into domestic exports rose significantly more slowly over the same timeframe, by 12.2%. When we take the prices of both imported goods and services incorporated into domestic exports into account, the price increase is 47.1%. In contrast, prices related to domestic value added increased by only 22.3%. Examples of value-added price increases include increased labour costs.

Prices of services imports and required imports rose less sharply

Within services exports, the prices of the required imports did not rise as fast as the prices of the imports required for goods exports. Between 2019 and 2022, export prices for services increased by 10.9%, while prices of services exports incorporated into goods imports only increased by 2.4% and those of processed services imports by 17.2%. Together, the import prices of goods and services incorporated into services imports increased by 15%. The prices of value added owing to exports did not increase as fast, at 9.1%.

Volumes of export earnings increased more sharply than volumes of imports processed into exports

Contrary to the price trends, export volumes have seen much slower growth or even a decline (see table 7.5.3). In terms of volumes, the rise in domestic exports was only 1.9% in the period between 2019 and 2022. During that same period, the import volume processed for the export of domestic goods declined by 5.9%. The decrease in volume of processed imported goods was 4.7% and the decrease in volume of processed imports of services was 9.2%. The value added by exports actually increased in the period between 2019 and 2022, by 8.3%.

When we look at volume trends in services exports, we see a modest increase of 1.5% in the 2019–2022 period. As with domestic exports, the volume of imports for processing into exports contracted. In the 2019–2022 period, the volume of imports processed into services exports dropped by 8.4%, whereby the volume of processed goods fell by 6.2% and that of processed services fell by 9%. The volume of export-induced value added, on the other hand, rose by 7.7%.

Despite price increases of imports for processing into exports, export earnings remained fairly stable. In terms of volume, export-induced value added increased, while the volume of imports processed into domestic exports actually contracted, in the case of both goods and services. The import content of the exports of domestic goods rose, nonetheless, while the earnings per euro of exports declined modestly by 1.1 eurocents in the period between 2019 and 2022. Notably, the production of domestic exports has required fewer services imports in recent years. The increase in the share of goods imports incorporated into the goods exports was thus mainly at the expense of the share of processed imports of services and only marginally at the expense of the export earnings.

7.6 International linkages through Dutch imports and exports

Where do the inputs for Dutch exports actually come from? This section examines the origin of goods and services imports, as well as the ultimate export destination of these imports after being processed in the Netherlands. It focuses not only on the relative importance of the EU-27, both as a supplier of inputs and an export market for Dutch imports used to produce exports, but also on specific key trading partners.

Table 7.6.1 illustrates the interconnectedness of the global economy via the Netherlands in 2022. To what extent are imports of goods and services from one country or region processed in the exports to another country? For example, enterprises in the Netherlands imported a total of €6.4bn worth of goods and services from China, of which approximately 48%, or €3.1bn, were found to have been processed in exports to the EU-27. At the same time, Dutch enterprises used €24.4bn worth of imports to be able to export goods and services to North and South America. Of these imports, 44% came from the EU-27, which is the same as the sum of imports from Belgium, Germany and other EU-27, 19% from the Americas, and 15% from Asia. The total value of the imports incorporated into Dutch exports was €222bn. This corresponds to the total value of imports for processing in the exports of goods and services, as shown in table 7.5.1. For €18.6bn worth of imports, we do not know the origin, nor where the exports for which they served as input go to. The largest part of the ‘elsewhere’ group concerns imports and/or exports that cannot be linked to a country, meaning that the country is unknown. The remainder of this group mainly comprises Australia and Oceania, insofar as these figures are known. Due to small input values, these are not shown separately in the table.

European production chains continue to be essential, but importance of EU trade has declined

Table 7.6.2 shows the same figures as table 7.6.1, but with a focus on the relative importance of the EU-27 and the change compared to a year before. The first thing to note is that the Netherlands plays an important role in intraregional trade within the European single market, as previously highlighted by Baldwin & Lopez-Gonzalez (2013) and Aerts et al. (2023). A substantial proportion of imports used to produce exports came from the EU-27 and then went to another, or the same, EU-27 country. This involves €50.4bn, or 22.7% of total imports for the purpose of intermediate consumption. This share was 0.5 percentage points lower than in 2021, despite the fact that the value of these imports was almost €10bn higher. The UK’s share was about 4% in both years.

Many Dutch imports from the EU-27 came from Germany (30.6%). This was 1.0 percentage point less than in 2021. Germany was followed by Belgium with a 20.2% share of the total imports from the EU-27. Altogether, imports used from all EU countries, except for Germany and Belgium, amounted to the other 49.2%.

Rise in value of imports used for exports mainly due to goods

Section 7.5 showed that the value of imported goods and services incorporated into exports rose sharply in 2022. At 34%, the rise in goods was twice that in services, which saw growth of 17%. The increase in the value of processed goods imports may be explained by a higher import value from all regions and countries represented separately in table 7.6.1. In particular, goods imports from Africa (+130%), Other America (+92%), the US (+82%) and Other Asia (+71%) surged. Goods imports from Europe, meaning Other EU-27 (+39%), the UK (+43%) and Belgium (+30%), processed into exports also saw strong growth. The only country or region in Figure 7.6.1 that noted a drop in goods imports incorporated into Dutch exports was Ukraine, with a drop of 32%. This was primarily due to a decline in imports of oils and fats from that country because of the war in that country. The trends behind Dutch agricultural trade with Ukraine and Russia are discussed further in Jukema et al. (2024).

Another observation is that the import value from Africa rose much more sharply in 2022 than in 2021. This trend may be related to significant price rises for crucial raw materials, such as crude oil, coffee, iron ore and copper. These significant price increases raw materials were also the subject of a CBS report on critical raw materials in the Dutch supply chain (Bohn et al., 2023). Furthermore, the value of Russian imports required for Dutch exports was almost constant compared to 2021, whereas the value doubled in 2021 compared to 2020 (Aerts et al., 2023). The fact the value of Russian imports remained virtually unchanged in 2021 and 2022 makes it appear that there have not been many changes, but this is not the case. In fact, there was a contraction in the volume of the raw materials and mineral fuel imports, partly due to the trade sanctions imposed by the EU and other Western countries. But this is offset by a large price increase for mineral fuels. These two opposite trends offset one another to a large extent.

The relatively small increase in services imports incorporated into exports applies to virtually all countries and regions, with increases ranging between 1% (Belgium) and 36% (Africa). The only exceptions were declines in imports of services from Ukraine (down by 43%) and from Russia (down by 12%). However, neither of these countries imported many services from the Netherlands in any case.

Imports of electrical appliances from China for exports increased

Apart from Europe, the US and China are once again important partners for Dutch imports that are processed by enterprises in the Netherlands, accounting for €27.2bn and €6.4bn, respectively. Together, these accounted for 15.1% of total imports incorporated into exports in 2022, which was somewhat higher than in 2021 (14.6%). In the case of both the US, which accounted for €20.3bn in 2021, and China, with €5.2bn in 2021, there was a slight increase in value compared to the previous year. The increase in the value of imports from both countries related mainly to a large rise in goods imports. The increase of services imports from both countries was below the average for all countries.

However, if we only take China’s share of 2.9% in imports for processing, this was comparable to the previous year, despite an increase in the value of imports compared with that year. It should be noted here that the Netherlands hardly imports any mineral fuels (which increased the most in price) from China, and that the dependence on specific, crucial products could well involve major dependencies, for example with regard to critical materials, something which Bohn et al. (2023) and Chapter 2 of this publication examine in more detail. In addition, Dijkstra and Los (2024) show that Dutch dependency on imports from China is even greater when indirect imports from China via other EU countries are taken into consideration.

The main imports used to process other goods from China were electrical appliances, which made up 12% of the import value of goods and services from China that are processed into exports, telecommunications equipment (10%), organic chemical products (10%) and metal goods (8%). Imports of Chinese electrical appliances in particular rose considerably in 2022 compared to the previous year: by 33% (or nearly €200 million). Conversely, imports of telecommunications equipment from China processed into exports contracted, both in terms of value and in share. Export goods made using inputs from China include a wide range of products, such as specialised machinery, electrical appliances, plastics and chemical products. Imports from China that were incorporated into Dutch exports were mostly destined for Germany (14%), the US (9%), Belgium (8%) and France (6%).

7.7 Analysing export-related imports in more detail

Sections 7.5 and 7.6 have mainly analysed macroeconomic developments and the geographical breakdown of imports that are processed into Dutch exports. In addition to this perspective it is also relevant to zoom in on the product level, as in the previous paragraph on China. Did macroeconomic developments in 2022 mainly relate to changes in the import values of certain goods or services, for example, from non-EU-27 countries?

The Netherlands mainly imports raw materials and mineral fuels for exports

Figure 7.7.1 shows the composition of goods imports used in the production of Dutch exports in 2022, by country of origin. This figure does not include re-exports, or goods that cannot be linked to a particular country. This latter concerns the ‘elsewhere-elsewhere’ flow as presented in Figure 7.6.1. We distinguish between five goods categories, based on the SITC 1 classification. A total of €56.8bn worth of raw materials and mineral fuels was required to produce exports in 2022. Enterprises in the Netherlands imported €20.3bn worth of manufactured products, €18.7bn worth of chemical products and €17.9bn worth of machinery and transportation equipment, and €17.4bn worth of food and beverages.

Almost half of goods imports destined for exports originate from the EU-27

In 2022, the EU-27 was once again the most important import partner of the Netherlands by far. In Figure 7.7.1, the 27 countries making up the EU are represented by Germany, Belgium and ‘Other EU-27’. The EU-27 are responsible for 44% of the goods imports required for Dutch exports. In the previous year, the figure was 49%, a trend associated with strong growth in the import value of mineral fuels in 2022. These mainly originate from outside the EU (also see Chapter 3). In 2022, the import value of raw materials and mineral fuels almost doubled compared to the previous year. This doubling applies to both the imports of these products from the EU as well as of those from non-EU countries. The growth rate of import value in the other categories was lower, but still accounted for an average increase of 20%.

The importance of import growth in mineral fuels from non-EU countries in increasing non-EU dependency on goods is also underlined by the EU’s share by goods category: the EU’s share was higher than 50% in every goods category except raw materials and mineral fuels. With regard to mineral fuels, 82% came from countries outside the EU. While this dependency on non-EU countries for mineral fuels was down by 1.0 percentage point from a year earlier, as this category increased sharply, the EU’s share of total goods imports still fell further. Without mineral fuels, the EU had a 63% share in the total imports incorporated into exports in 2022. This share remained the same as in 2021.

In general, mineral fuels in the Netherlands are often incorporated into exports in the same category (mineral fuels), but also into exports of organic chemical products, plastics in primary forms, manufacturing services and transport services. An example of this is crude oil imported into the Netherlands via its sea ports, which is then processed into final products in oil refineries, such as crude oil, paraffin, diesel and LPG, or into semi-finished products. Semi-finished products, may, for example, serve as a raw material for plastics used to produce toys or packaging materials for distribution to other countries.

The 5.0 percentage point drop in the share of total goods imports imported from the EU-27 in 2022 cannot be fully attributed to the mineral fuels discussed previously. The EU’s share of imports of chemical products also fell by 6 percentage points. At the same time, however, the EU’s share of imports of machinery and transportation equipment (up by 5 percentage points) and of food and beverages (up by 4 percentage points) actually rose compared to 2021. The highest degree of import dependency on EU countries concerned industrial products (69%), food and beverages (64%) and chemical products (63%).

Imports of ICT services incorporated into exports rose sharply in 2022

As shown in section 7.5, the Netherlands also imports a large amount of services in order to enable exports. As much as 40% of total imports for processing involved services (€88.4bn) in 2022. This was 3.0 percentage points less than the share of imported services in the previous year, but it still covered a large share despite the enormous price increases that have affected imported goods in particular over the last few years. These imported services are used not only to facilitate the exports of services, such as software or consulting services, but also to facilitate the production of various export goods such as passenger cars, chemical products and machinery. This shift towards services is related to the outsourcing of service activities by industrial enterprises (Bohn et al., 2022).

Figure 7.7.2 shows the top 6 imported services that were required for Dutch exports in 2022. The service category of ‘Other business services’ came first, with an import value of €25.0bn. Examples include management consultancy services and R&D services. This category was followed by imports of royalties, with a value of €15.5bn. These are remunerations for intellectual property. Imports in the transport services category amounted to €13.8bn and imports of ICT services amounted to €7.3bn. These four categories collectively made up 85% of total services imports used to produce Dutch exports in 2022.

Rising by 24% and 22% respectively, imports of royalties and imports of ICT services saw the largest increases in the past year, while the increase in other business services was considerably lower, at 9%. Services imports from the EU-27 countries were up by 18%. That was twice the increase from non-EU countries.

In contrast to the relatively high EU shares in imports of goods as shown by Figure 7.7.2, the EU shares of multiple service categories was below 50%. The share of services imports processed into exports originating from the EU had increased slightly in 2022 and amounted to 51%, and increase of 2.0 percentage points. This, too, was contrary to the trend in goods imports. After all, that share fell for goods imports.

Almost half of services imports processed into exports are destined for the EU-27

Looking at the export markets, it turns out that 47% of the services required for Dutch exports in 2022 were destined for one of the other EU-27 countries. The main export markets for the processed services imports were Germany (14%), the US (9%), the UK (8%), Belgium (7%) and France (6%). The EU share and those of the major export markets remained virtually unchanged compared to the previous year. Among the most important imported services categories, i.e. other business services, royalties, transport services and ICT services, the top 5 export markets were all similar, with Germany invariably the largest export market in each service category, followed by the US in second place and the UK ranking third.

7.8 References



Aerts, N., Bohn, T., Notten, T., Creemers, S., Notten, T., & Weusten, M. (2023). Use of imports in the Dutch economy. In S. Creemers & D. Herbers (Eds.), . Statistics Netherlands.

Baldwin, R., & Lopez-Gonzalez, J. (2015). . The World Economy, 38(11), 1682–1721.

Bohn, T., Notten, T., Prenen, L., & Wong, K. F. (2022). Services ‘in boxes’: the role of indirect service exports. In D. Herbers & J. . Statistics Netherlands.

Bohn, T., Notten, T., Ramaekers, P., & Wong, K. F. (2023). [Critical materials in the Dutch supply chain]. Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2016, 13 October). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 30 May 2024.

CBS (2022, 9 September). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 28 May 2024.

CBS (2023). . [Dataset]. Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 23 May 2024.

CBS (2024a, 5 July). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 5 July 2024.

CBS (2024b, 19 March). . Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 23 May 2024.

Dijkstra, H., & Los, B. (2024). [Less dependence on Chinese imports not a simple matter economically]. Economisch Statistische Berichten (an economics journal), yet to be published.

Franssen, L., Lemmers, O., Prenen, L., & Wong, K. F. (2020). [UK more dependent on EU than previously thought]. Economisch Statistische Berichten (an economics journal), 105(4786), 268–271.

Jukema, G., Ramaekers, P., & Berkhout, P. (2024). . [The Dutch agricultural sector in an international context – 2024 edition]. Wageningen Economic Research & CBS.

Lemmers, O., Notten, T., Wong, K.F., Dahlmans, D., & Prenen, L. (2023). [The supply chains of five industries: which countries of control, which products]. Statistics Netherlands.

Mellens, M. C., Noordman, H. G., & Verbruggen, J. P. (2007). . Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB).

Notten, T. (2022, 14 November). [Powerpoint slides]. CBS Wereldcafé. Statistics Netherlands. Accessed on 30 May 2024.





Noten

For example, China may act as a supplier of a German export product to the Netherlands. This example is referred to as an indirect import. The CBS source data used do not allow an examination of such indirect dependencies between the Netherlands and third countries – in this example, China – through other links in the chain. An in-depth analysis of indirect dependencies and global value chain linkages requires multiregional input-output tables. For recent analyses of indirect dependencies with regard to direct and indirect imports of critical materials, refer to Bohn et al. (2023). See Lemmers et al. (2023) for a supply chain analysis of five strategic industries, and Dijkstra and Los (2024) for indirect dependencies on China.

A more detailed breakdown of the goods categories at SITC-2 level discussed in this section is also available in the set of tables appended to this publication.

The figures in this chapter were obtained by combining the data from the National Accounts with the International Trade in Goods statistics and the International Trade in Services statistics, with the data of the National Accounts taking precedence. Because of differences in definitions and methods, these figures differ from the other totals shown on StatLine or in the other chapters of this publication, which are both based on the trade statistics.Footprint of Dutch imports

Authors: Nieke Aerts, Stef Weijers

While emissions from Dutch industry and the land use of the agrarian sector within the Netherlands have been under discussion for years, the impact of imports into the Netherlands continues to grow. However, we cannot do without imports. For instance, certain raw materials are scarcely available in the Netherlands or not available at all. Moreover, it is sometimes more efficient for Dutch enterprises to concentrate certain activities abroad rather than doing everything themselves. In the previous chapter, we demonstrated how crucial imports are to the Dutch economy. However, it is important that we also study the impact of those imports. For example, how much land is used to produce the goods that the Netherlands imports? And how many raw materials are required? What are the greenhouse gas emissions associated with goods exported into the Netherlands as a result of their production in other countries?

8.1 Key findings

Land use footprint of Dutch imports

The total land use footprint of Dutch imports is approximately 43 million hectares, almost 13 times the land area of the Netherlands. Only 12 million hectares of this footprint relate to imports that remain in the Netherlands , but that is still almost four times the land area of the Netherlands.

More than 53% of the total land use footprint of imports consists of cropland, but for imports that ultimately leave the Netherlands this is almost 57%. This is followed by forests at 26% and pastures at almost 20%. Land use for mining has a share of less than 1%.

The food and beverage industry, which imports many agricultural products, accounts for the largest share of the land use footprint for intermediate imports with land use of approximately 11 million hectares, followed by that of the wood, paper and printing industries at almost 2 million hectares.

The land use footprint of (intermediate) imports for direct and indirect domestic consumption is fairly concentrated in Germany in terms of agricultural fields, and in Russia in terms of forests. When it comes to intermediate imports for export and imports for re-export, there is a higher concentration of agricultural use in Argentina and Brazil and forest areas in Brazil. The use of pasture in all import flows is relatively highly concentrated in China.

Material footprint of Dutch imports

The material footprint of Dutch imports amounted to 1,687 megatons (1 megaton = 1 billion kilograms) in 2020. Of this, 32% were fossil energy sources, 31% non-metallic minerals (such as sand, gravel and clay), 27% biomass and 11% metals.

The majority of these raw materials, 867 megatons were used for intermediate imports. These mainly consisted of non-metallic minerals (324 megatons) and fossil fuels (318 megatons). The majority of the material footprint of the imports for re-export (673 megatons) and for domestic consumption (147 megatons) consisted of biomass. Of the total metals footprint of Dutch imports, the majority was intended for re-export.

The oil refinery industry accounts for the largest share of the material footprint of Dutch intermediate imports for export at more than 150 megatons, mainly crude oil and natural gas. The construction sector accounts for the largest share of the material footprint of Dutch intermediate imports for domestic production at more than 150 megatons, mainly consisting of non-metallic minerals.

The biomass footprint of Dutch imports is relatively widely dispersed, with a relative concentration in Germany and to a lesser extent Brazil. The use of fossil fuels for Dutch imports was strongly concentrated in Russia for all import flows in 2020. The footprint for metals and non-metallic minerals was relatively highly concentrated in China for Dutch imports for direct domestic consumption and imports for re-exports, but for intermediate imports these uses were more concentrated in South America and Germany, respectively.

Greenhouse gas footprint of Dutch imports

The total greenhouse gas (GHG) footprint of Dutch imports amounted to 505 megatons of CO 2 equivalent (about 1% of the world total in 2020, Ritchie et al., 2024). This includes emissions of carbon dioxide (264 megatons of CO 2 eq.), carbon dioxide from biomass as an energy source (74 megatons of CO 2 eq.), nitrous oxide (60 megatons of CO 2 eq.) and methane (107 megatons of CO 2 eq.).

The largest share of this GHG footprint is caused by imports destined for other countries: 232 megatons of CO 2 eq. for imports for re-export and 145 megatons of CO2 eq. for intermediate imports intended for export. Imports for direct domestic consumption had the smallest GHG footprint (55 megatons of CO 2 eq.). For intermediate imports intended for domestic consumption, the footprint was 71 megatons of CO 2 eq.

The food and beverages industry accounts for the largest share of the GHG footprint of all Dutch intermediate imports: one-fifth of the total. The share of the construction sector in the GHG footprint of Dutch intermediate imports for domestic consumption is relatively large (almost 21%); for the chemicals sector this applies to its share in the GHG footprint of intermediate imports for exports (15%).

The GHG footprint of Dutch imports is highly concentrated in China: more than 18% of GHG emissions related to imports for direct domestic consumption, almost 9% of those are related to intermediate imports, and almost 16% of those are related to imports for re-export, take place in China.

Outline

In section 8.2, we explain what the import footprint is and which footprints we report on in this chapter. Each of the following sections discusses one type of environmental footprint. In section 8.3, it is the land use footprint. This is followed by the material footprint in section 8.4 and the greenhouse gas footprint in section 8.5. The description of the data and method used may be found in section 8.6.

8.2 Explanation and procedure followed

What is the import footprint?

Climate change and climate goals have been high on the political agenda for years (Government of the Netherlands, 2022). In order to make sure that Earth remains inhabitable, we need to use the planet’s resources more prudently. In terms of climate goals, the immediate concern is what happens within our national borders: for example, how much CO 2 is emitted in the Netherlands and how can we reduce that amount? But as citizens of the Netherlands, we are not only responsible for what happens in the Netherlands. Virtually every Dutch person owns many things that were not made in the Netherlands, or only in part. Impacts from production abroad do not count towards the Netherlands’ climate goals, but they are at least as important. The national Climate Agreement (Government of the Netherlands, 2019) notes that the Netherlands’ environmental footprint abroad has received too little attention and should be the subject of more research.

This chapter focuses on the footprint of imports . The import footprint of a product comprises everything that happens in the production chain of that product until it comes into the ownership of an enterprise or person in the Netherlands. So to determine the footprint of an imported package of roasted coffee beans, we look at the growing and harvesting of the beans, the roasting of the beans and the transport and storage of the beans until they come into Dutch ownership. What takes place after that in the Netherlands no longer counts towards the import footprint. Imports may be broken down by use, with a distinction being drawn between imports that remain in the Netherlands and imports that leave the Netherlands again. Although it may be argued that products that leave the Netherlands again after being imported are not our responsibility, it can equally be argued that the Netherlands indirectly contributes to those emissions. After all, the Netherlands earned 11 cents from every euro of re-exports in 2022 (also see Chapter 6 of this publication).

Imports that remain in the Netherlands are also included in the Dutch consumption footprint – the total footprint of everything consumed by residents of the Netherlands. That consumption footprint equals the total footprint within the Netherlands plus the import footprint minus the export footprint. The import footprint minus the export footprint is also known as the emissions trade balance. Countries whose import footprints are larger than their export footprints are called net importers. So for example, if CO 2 emissions embedded in trade are considered, the Netherlands is a net importer and the EU is the largest net importer in the world (Global Carbon Budget, 2023). Statistics Netherlands (CBS) also conducts research into the consumption footprint (Walker et al., 2017; Walker et al., 2023).

Different measurable effects: different footprints

There are many different secondary effects of a production process that impact on the world around us. Some of those secondary effects can be measured. Perhaps the best-known example are CO 2 emissions. For every measurable secondary effect of a production process, a footprint can be calculated. This chapter considers three measurable effects:

Land use: what area of land is needed and for what type of land use? Forest, cropland, pastures or land used for mining? We call this the land use footprint .

Raw materials use: how many raw materials are needed? Here, a distinction is drawn between the use of biomass, fossil fuels, metals and non-metallic minerals. We call this the material footprint .

Emissions of greenhouse gases: emissions of CO 2 (from biomass and fossil fuels) N 2 O (nitrous oxide) and CH 4 (methane) are included in the greenhouse gas footprint .

Interpretation of this research

In this chapter, we investigate the land, material and greenhouse gas footprints associated with imports into the Netherlands. At the level of detail of this study, data are only available for the year 2020. It is therefore currently not possible to infer any trend regarding the impact that Dutch imports have on other countries. However, the data currently available do allow us to gain an insight into those footprints and the differences between them at a detailed level. In which countries do Dutch imports have an impact? And which industries are responsible for that impact? Here we are investigating the heterogeneity of Dutch imports; their total value is less important in this study. For more detail on the data and method used, see section 8.6.

This is the first time that CBS has calculated the material and land use footprints of imports in this manner and level of detail. CBS has previously investigated the greenhouse gas footprint of Dutch imports based on other data (Aerts et al., 2023).

The research in question considered the 2015–2021 period: it showed that the greenhouse gas footprint of Dutch imports is growing. One reason for this is the increasing volume of imports. That increase is largely caused by imports of goods and services that ultimately find their way abroad.

8.3 Land use footprint of imports

The land use footprint of total Dutch consumption is estimated at 12.4 million hectares (ha), of which 80% lies abroad (CBS, PBL, RIVM, WUR, 2024). The land use footprint of imports – which by definition lies abroad – therefore accounts for the greater part of the consumption footprint.

Figure 8.3.1 clearly shows that cropland accounts for the largest share of the footprint of Dutch imports. This is primarily due to imports of processed and unprocessed agricultural products. This finding does not reflect the global ratio of cropland land to pasture. Approximately one-third of the world’s total land area is used for agriculture. But of that, nearly two-thirds is pasture and only one-third cropland (FAO, 2023). This may be explained by the fact that a lot of livestock farming takes place in the Netherlands but not enough land is available to provide food for all those animals.

In the rest of this section, the land use footprints of Dutch imports for direct domestic consumption, for intermediate use and for re-export are described.

Land use for imports for direct domestic consumption more than 1.5 times the land area of the Netherlands

Imports for direct domestic consumption consist primarily of final products directly for a consumer – for instance, clothing, cars, food products – and final products that are used by enterprises – for instance cars, computers and machines.

Dutch imports for direct domestic consumption require nearly 5.2 million hectares, or 52 thousand km 2 . That is 1.5 times the land area of the Netherlands , which covers nearly 3.4 million hectares. The majority of that, just under 2.3 million hectares, consists of cropland, with over 1.7 million hectares of pastures and over 1.1 million hectares of forest; see also Figure 8.3.2. Only 12,400 hectares are used for mining. That is less than 1% of the total land use footprint.

Nearly half, over 2.5 million hectares, of the land use footprint of imports for direct domestic consumption is attributable to imports of food products. Food products include processed agricultural products such as veal and beef or chocolate (see Figure 8.3.3). A relatively large area of land is used for the production of these goods. A further 12.5% (more than 655 thousand hectares) of this footprint is related to imports of unprocessed agricultural products, such as vegetables, fruit and flowers. Imports for the direct domestic consumption of wood (over 254 thousand hectares), beverages (over 243 thousand hectares), furniture (240 thousand hectares) and clothing (over 174 thousand hectares) also contribute to this footprint.

Figure 8.3.3 reveals that, of the different product groups, imports of food products for direct domestic consumption are responsible for the largest land use footprint in virtually every country. The only exception to this is China, where imports of computers and other electronics for direct domestic consumption in the Netherlands are associated with land use of approximately 42 thousand hectares, an area more than 2.5 times the size of the municipality of Amsterdam or 4.5 times the size of the island of Terschelling.

Cropland accounts for more than half of all land use for intermediate imports for export

A land area of nearly 19.7 million hectares is utilised for intermediate imports, i.e. imports of goods and services which are processed in the Netherlands. That is nearly six times the land area of the Netherlands. Of this, over 12.5 million hectares, nearly four times the size of the Netherlands, are used for intermediate imports which are processed for export. The rest, over 7.1 million hectares, more than twice the size of the Netherlands, is used for intermediate imports which are processed for the domestic market. Of the total land use for intermediate imports, 57% consists of cropland, nearly 28% of forest, over 14% of pastures and half a percent of land used for mining. However, the ratios between the different types of land use for intermediate imports for processing into exports (Figure 8.3.4) clearly differ from those for domestic consumption (Figure 8.3.5). A relatively large proportion of the land use for domestic consumption consists of forest. This can be explained by the relatively large share of the timber, paper and printing, construction and furniture industries in the land use footprint of intermediate imports for the domestic market (table 8.3.6).

A total of 46% of land use for total intermediate imports is caused by imports of unprocessed agricultural products. One-fifth is the result of imports of food products for intermediate use. It is therefore no surprise that food, beverages and tobacco is the industry with the largest share of this land use footprint (table 8.3.6). The land use for intermediate imports for this sector covers an area of approximately 11.1 million hectares, more than three times the size of the Netherlands.

Source: PBL, FIGARO (2024)

Large proportion of land used for imports for re-export in Brazil

Imports used for re-export are associated with a combined land area of approximately 18.1 million hectares, more than five times the size of the Netherlands. Over half of this is cropland, 26% is forest and 22% is pastures, while less than 1% is land used for mining. Although that may seem very little, it represents nearly 60% of the total mining footprint of Dutch imports, whereas ‘only’ 42% of the total land use footprint is attributable to imports used in re-exports.

As Figure 8.3.8 shows, a large part of the land use for imports for re-export is associated with agricultural products and food products. Exceptions to this are China and, to a lesser extent, Russia. In China, a relatively large area of land is used for Dutch re-exports of imported computers and electronics and other industrial products. In Russia, in connection with this import flow, a relatively large area of land is used for wood, the production of paper and the production of other industrial products.

8.4 Material footprint of imports

The material footprint is the most volatile of the three footprints in this chapter. Depending on the data source and method chosen, the results can differ greatly (Giljum et al., 2019). Previously published results (for example CBS, 2023a) differ considerably from the results presented in this chapter. This is partly due to methodological improvements and partly due to the fact that detailed data has been used in this chapter in order to be able to interpret the distribution within the material footprint.

The worldwide use of natural resources continues to rise. Since 2022, raw materials extraction has exceeded 100 billion tons per year (United Nations Environment Programme & International Resource Panel, 2024). Approximately half of this consists of non-metallic minerals, such as sand, gravel and clay. The EU and the Netherlands are net importers of raw materials. The largest share of the Netherlands’ material footprint therefore lies abroad.

Europe’s material consumption footprint has been fairly stable since 2012, and Dutch people consume fewer raw materials per capita than the EU average (European Environment Agency, 2023). For the whole of Europe, the consumption footprint of non-metallic minerals is the largest, followed by biomass, fossil fuels and metals. Figure 8.4.1 reveals that the distribution of the material footprint of the Netherlands is comparable with that of Europe as a whole when only imports for direct domestic consumption and intermediate imports for domestic consumption are considered. Of the Netherlands’ material consumption footprint, 92% takes place abroad (CBS, 2023a).

The material footprint of imports thus accounts for the greater part of this consumption footprint, as it does for the land use footprint. The total material footprint of imports was 1,687 billion kilograms (megatons), distributed between raw material types. Imports of biomass were mainly destined for re-export. Imports of fossil fuels are primarily used for the production of export goods. Of non-metallic minerals, such as sand, gravel and clay, the majority are used for production destined for the domestic market.

Many raw materials in imports for direct domestic consumption from China

In 2020, imports for direct domestic consumption amounted to nearly 147 megatons of raw materials, of which over 63 megatons of biomass, 40 megatons of fossil fuels, 13 megatons of metals and over 30 megatons of non-metallic minerals. A megaton is a unit of mass equal to 1 billion kilograms.

Figure 8.4.2 shows that the distribution in the biomass footprint of imports for direct domestic consumption is relatively large. The other material footprints are more concentrated. Almost half of the footprint of fossil fuels processed for imports for direct domestic consumption was limited to just four countries in 2020: Russia (nearly 18.5%), the UK (nearly 12%), China (nearly 9.5%) and Norway (over 9%). It is doubtful whether the share of this footprint in Russia has fallen since the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, given the fact that China, for example, has started importing more Russian oil since then (De Mott, 2024) and the Netherlands still imports a lot of products from China (CBS, 2023b). The footprint of metals related to imports for direct domestic consumption is relatively highly concentrated in China (16%). A relatively large part of this footprint is also located in Australia: nearly 11%.

The material footprint of non-metallic minerals such as sand, gravel, clay, chalk and salt processed for imports for direct domestic consumption is also highly concentrated in China (nearly 27%). Germany also accounts for a significant part of this footprint: over 12%.

Use of raw materials for intermediate imports highly concentrated in a few countries

In 2020, it is estimated that 867 megatons were processed for intermediate imports, of which 159 megatons of biomass, 318 megatons of fossil fuels, 66 megatons of metals and 324 megatons of non-metallic minerals. Approximately two-thirds of these, directly or indirectly, imported biomass, fossil fuels and metals were used for production for foreign countries and a third for production for the domestic market. For intermediate imports of non-metallic minerals such as sand, gravel and clay, the ratio was precisely reversed. This is due to the use of non-metallic minerals in construction and the building materials industry, which primarily produce for the domestic market (see Figure 8.4.4).

Figure 8.4.3 shows that of all the individual countries, Germany accounts for the largest share of the biomass footprint of imports for intermediate use at over 16%. Over 37% of the biomass used for intermediate imports cannot be assigned to a particular country. Of this, two-fifths come from European countries and a quarter from African countries.

In 2020, Russia was the country with the highest proportion of fuels used for imports for intermediate use at nearly 17.5% (see Figure 8.4.3). However, of the consumption of fossil fuels for intermediate imports, 54% comes from countries not specified here, of which three-fifths from African countries such as Nigeria, Algeria and Angola and nearly a third from Asian countries such as Iraq and Kuwait.

Of all the metals processed in intermediate imports, nearly 16% come from Brazil, a little under 8% from Australia and over 6% from Sweden. Of the two-fifths of metals not assigned to a country, over half comes from Latin American countries such as Chile, Peru and Bolivia.

Germany is an important supplier of the non-metallic minerals processed in intermediate imports, with nearly 22%. Nearly 38% of these minerals are not assigned to a particular country; of that, 58% are from African countries such as Gabon, Libya and Cameroon and 31% from Asian countries including Taiwan and Iraq.

Figure 8.4.4 shows that the raw materials usage of intermediate imports varies both between industries and also between those for exports and those for the domestic market. Of all sectors, the oil-refining industry uses the largest quantities, in an absolute sense, of raw materials from abroad for exports: more than 150 megatons, primarily consisting of crude oil and natural gas (table 8.4.5). With regard to imports for domestic production, the largest quantities of raw materials are used by the Dutch construction sector, also more than 150 megatons, followed by the building materials industry, which imports or (in)directly consumes in excess of a further 40 megatons of raw materials for production for the domestic market. These sectors mainly use non-metallic minerals such as sand, gravel and clay, but also large quantities of fossil fuels and metals. The food, beverages and tobacco industry has the second-highest usage of raw materials for intermediate imports for export (Figure 8.4.4). The use of raw materials for intermediate imports for domestic production is much lower for this sector. The same is true for agriculture, forestry and fisheries.

Table 8.4.5 shows that the material footprint for intermediate imports per raw material used is dominated by imports of one or two product categories, with some differences between use for intermediate imports for export and use for the domestic market. For example, the use of metal for intermediate imports for export is strongly associated with imports of metal ores. For the domestic market, for example use in the construction sector and building materials industry, it is strongly associated with imports of metals in primary form. The biomass usage for intermediate imports of chemical products processed for export is also relatively high, and that of wood is relatively low.

Source: PBL, FIGARO (2024)

Biomass accounts for a third of the material footprint of imports for re-export

In 2020, a total of 673 megatons of raw materials were required for imports for re-export. Of this, 236 megatons consisted of biomass, 175 megatons of fossil fuels, 101 megatons of metals and 161 megatons of other non-metallic minerals.

Of that biomass, more than half has not been assigned to a specific country. Of this, 42% comes from African countries, 37% from Latin American countries, 11% from Asia and 9% from European countries not specified here. Of those countries which are specified, Brazil and Germany, with 7% (16 megatons) each, have the largest shares. See Figure 8.4.6.

Of the fossil fuels used as raw materials in imports for re-export, nearly 19% came from Russia, over 8% from China and nearly 6% from the UK. More than 35% has not been assigned to a country. Of this, over two-fifths came from Asia, for example the Middle East, a third from Africa and over a fifth from Latin America.

More than 56% of the metals used in imports for re-export came from other countries. Of this, the lion’s share (72%) came from Latin America, in particular from Chile, Bolivia and Peru. Of the individual countries, China had the largest share with nearly 8%, followed by Australia (6%) and the US (less than 6%).

Of all countries, China accounts for the largest share of the use of non-metallic minerals of imports for re-export at 19% (Figure 8.4.6), followed by Germany with over 9%. Nearly 35% could not be attributed to an individual country. Of this, 43% came from Africa, in particular Gabon, Morocco and Libya , and 38% from Asia, primarily Taiwan and Malaysia.

8.5 Greenhouse gas footprint of imports

This section discussed the greenhouse gas footprint of imports in more detail. This footprint includes the total emissions of the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), nitrous oxide (N 2 O) and methane (CH 4 ) released throughout the entire chain of a product until it is imported into the Netherlands. In order to be able to calculate the greenhouse effect of these gases, the emissions of these gases are expressed in CO 2 equivalents. One kg of CO 2 equivalents corresponds to the impact of one kg of CO 2 emissions. The emission of 1 kg of nitrous oxide (N 2 O) corresponds to 265 kg of CO 2 equivalents, and the emission of 1 kg of methane (CH 4 ) equals 28 kg of CO 2 equivalents.

Figure 8.5.1 breaks down the greenhouse gas footprint of Dutch imports in 2020 by use. Virtually no difference is discernible between the different greenhouse gases in their shares by use. This is interesting because the range of imported products does differ between the different import flows. As with the land use and material footprints, the largest share of the import footprint is associated with products that ultimately leave the Netherlands.

Food products leading contributor to greenhouse gas footprint of imports for direct domestic consumption

In 2020, nearly 55 megatons of CO 2 equivalents were emitted in connection with imports for direct domestic consumption. Of this, slightly under 55% consisted of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), nearly 19% of methane (CH 4 ), less than 14% of CO 2 emissions from biomass and over 13% of nitrous oxide (N 2 O). Over 18% of this greenhouse gas footprint relates to emissions in China, nearly 8% to emissions in Germany and nearly 5% to emissions in India. Of all product groups, imports of food products account for the largest share of this greenhouse gas footprint a little under 20%, followed by imports of agricultural products at 15% (see Figure 8.5.2). Even though the land use associated with imports for direct domestic consumption of computers and electronics is relatively limited, the share of this trade flow in the greenhouse gas footprint is relatively large: 8%. Nearly 60% of these emissions take place in China. One-third of the emissions related to imports for direct domestic consumption of clothing, 30% of those of machinery and over 17% of those of motor vehicles also takes place in China.

Construction has largest greenhouse gas footprint of intermediate imports for domestic consumption

In terms of intermediate imports, a total of 216 megatons of CO 2 equivalents of greenhouse gases are emitted, of which two-thirds are associated with imports for export production (table 8.5.3). A relatively large amount of methane and nitrous oxide are released in intermediate imports processed for export.

Source: PBL, FIGARO (2024)

As with imports for direct domestic consumption, China is the country with the largest share in the greenhouse gas footprint of intermediate imports, at nearly 9% (table 8.5.4). In addition, a significant share of the emissions of greenhouse gases linked to this import flow take place in Russia and Germany with 15 megatons each, in Belgium and Brazil with 13 megatons each, and in the US with 11 megatons. The proportions of those emissions associated with intermediate imports for production for domestic consumption fluctuate per country (table 8.5.4). Less than a third of this greenhouse gas footprint takes place in countries not specified here , notably in Africa and Asia, which account for 42% and 34%, respectively, of those emissions not assigned to a country.

Source: PBL, FIGARO (2024)

Figure 8.5.5 shows, for the ten industries with the largest greenhouse gas footprint for intermediate imports, the distribution of that footprint by the ten product groups with the largest greenhouse gas footprint. The intermediate imports of these industries account for nearly three-quarters of the total greenhouse gas footprint of intermediate imports, as well as three-quarters of that of export production and approximately two-thirds of that of production for the domestic market.

Intermediate imports for the food, beverages and tobacco industry have the largest greenhouse gas footprint, due primarily to imports of agricultural products and food products. This industry accounts for over a fifth of the total greenhouse gas footprint of intermediate imports, a quarter of that for export production and over 14% of that of production for the domestic market. It is followed in footprint size by the oil-refining industry, the chemical industry and construction. Imports for the construction industry for production for domestic consumption have a relatively large greenhouse gas footprint; the Dutch chemical industry has a relatively large greenhouse gas footprint of imports for export production.

Agricultural products cause 20% of greenhouse gas footprint of imports for re-export

More than 230 megatons of CO 2 equivalents of greenhouse gases are emitted for imports for re-export. Of this greenhouse gas footprint, 53% is carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), a little under 18% methane (CH 4 ), 15% CO 2 from biomass and nearly 14% nitrous oxide (N 2 O).

A third of these emissions takes place in countries not specified here , of which 42% in Asia, 26% in Africa, 22% in Latin America and 9% in Europe. Nearly 16% take place in China, over 5% in Russia and 5% in Brazil.

At more than 21%, agricultural products account for the largest share of these emissions, followed by chemical products (14%). Figure 8.5.6 shows that emissions of greenhouse gases related to imports for re-export of agricultural products are geographically widely distributed. However, South Africa and Brazil do each account for a share of over 10% of this footprint. Nearly 16% of emissions linked to imports for re-export of food products also take place in Brazil. Some 60% of greenhouse gas emissions due to imports for re-export of computers and electronics take place in China. Relatively large shares of greenhouse gas emissions related to imports for re-export of both cokes and refined petroleum products, and of metals in primary form take place in Russia.

8.6 Data and methods

Determining the footprints for a country is not easy. The secondary effects may be measurable in broad outlines, but not in detail. For example, it is virtually impossible to calculate the quantity of CO 2 emissions caused by a product if different products are being manufactured in the same factory. Furthermore, there are differences in the specifications of bilateral trade, which are balanced by making datasets representing the global economy. There is therefore no dataset that can be used to precisely calculate all footprints for all the countries. Indeed, numerous different datasets are available that give different results. In Giljum et al. (2019), those differences are investigated for different datasets. The discrepancies can be very substantial; the material footprint for the Netherlands per resident calculated using Eora is nearly double that calculated using OECD ICIO. For each calculation, choices are made: which dataset and which type of calculation best suits this study? The goal of the study thus partly determines what is the best method and the best underlying data. The results from different studies, carried out using different methods and underlying data, cannot therefore be compared directly.

In the case of the import footprint, we are interested in the heterogeneity within Dutch imports; the total value is less important in this study. It is therefore important that we consider the actual import flows. To this end, we use the data from CBS, as it contains a lot of information about imports. What is being imported? Where was it made? What is it used for? For this purpose, we combine the International Trade in Goods statistics with the National Accounts, which allows imports to be broken down by use and by country (Aerts et al., 2021; Lemmers & Wong, 2017).

On the other hand, we need to know the footprint of these imports, preferably at detailed level. To this end, we use the PBL-FIGARO dataset (In ’t Veld & Wilting, 2024). This is a modified Multi-Regional Input-Output table (MRIO) based on the FIGARO MRIO, with the GLORIA MRIO being used to add more detail and new environmental data. In PBL-FIGARO, greenhouse gas emissions, land use and raw materials consumption are given per industry per country. This MRIO contains many different industries but only 45 countries and ‘rest of the world’. At the time of writing, this MRIO is only available for 2020.

If we were only to take the import flows from PBL-FIGARO, we would arrive at different import footprints, with the greatest discrepancy being in the material footprint. All the differences result from differences in the level of imports. We have studied different import flows in detail and observed that the CBS data provide a better reflection of reality than the import data in PBL-FIGARO, which corresponds with the trade data in FIGARO. The fact that the Dutch trade data does not tally with the data in FIGARO is a familiar problem, one due primarily to the fact that international trade is balanced in FIGARO (Remond-Tiedrez & Rueda-Cantuche, 2019, chapter 13 A/B). The differences between FIGARO and the Dutch trade data have been investigated previously (Walker et al., 2024).

In this study, the footprints have been calculated with the help of input-output analysis. This is a commonly used macroeconomic method for calculating, among other things, environmental footprints (Wiedman 2009; Kitzes 2013).

By combining the import dataset with PBL-FIGARO, the footprint of Dutch imports can be calculated. For more details on this method, the reader is referred to section 5.7 of the internationalisation monitor on sustainable trade (Aerts et al., 2023).

For a few parts of this chapter, the level of detail in PBL-FIGARO was not sufficient. In particular, in some cases the ‘rest of the world’ fraction was very large. In those cases, we used the GLORIA MRIO to specify the ‘rest of the world’ fraction in more detail. GLORIA contains 164 countries/regions and, again, emissions and land use and raw materials consumption are given per industry per country. We used the MRIO from release 057 of the GLORIA global environment-extended multi-region input-output database (Lenzen et al., 2021a), developed in the Global MRIO lab (Lenzen et al., 2017).

8.7 References



Aerts, N., Bohn, T., Lemmers, O., & Wong, K. F. (2021). . Statistics Netherlands.

Aerts, N., Bohn, T., Lemmers, O., & Wong, K. F. (2023). De Nederlandse invoervoetafdruk onder de loep. In J. Rooyakkers & M. Weusten (Eds.), Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2023a, 7 February). [Raw material footprint for consumption dropped to 7 thousand kilos per person]. Statistics Netherlands.

CBS (2023b). The Netherlands in Numbers, 2023 edition. Statistics Netherlands.

CBS, PBL, RIVM, WUR (2024, 15 February). [Land use footprint], 1990–2021. Statistics Netherlands; Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency; National Institute for Public Health and the Environment; and Wageningen University and Research.

De Mott, F. (2024, 19 March). . [China imports substantially more oil from Russia as India cuts purchases due to western sanctions]. Business Insider. Accessed on 15 May 2024.

European Environment Agency (2023, 5 December). . Accessed on 15 May 2024.

FAO (2023). . FAOSTAT Analytical Briefs Series, No. 71. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Giljum, S., Wieland, H., Lutter, S., Eisenmenger, N., Schandl, H., & Owen, A. (2019). . Journal of Industrial Ecology, 23(4), 946–958.

Global Carbon Budget (2023). . [Dataset]. Global Carbon Project. Accessed on 21 May 2024.

Kitzes J. (2013). . Resources, 2(4), 489–503.

Lemmers, O., & Wong, K. F. (2019). . National Institute Economic Review, 249(1), R59-R67.

Lenzen, M., Geschke, A., Abd Rahman, M. D., Xiao, Y., Fry, J., Reyes, R., Dietzenbacher, E., Inomata, S., Kanemoto, K., Los, B., Moran, D., Schulte in den Baumen, H., Tukker, A., Walmsley, T., Wiedmann, T., Wood, R., & Yamano, N. (2017). . Economic Systems Research, 29(2), 158–186.

Lenzen, M., Geschke, A., West, J., Fry, J., Malik, A., Giljum, S., Canals, L. M., Pinero, P., Lutter, S., Wiedmann, T., Li, M., Sevenster, M., Potočnik, J., Teixeira, I., Voore, M. V., Nansai, K., & Schandl, H. (2021). . Nature Sustainability, 5, 157–166.

Minx, J., Wiedmann, T., Wood, R., Peters, G., Lenzen, M., Owen, A., Scott, K., Barrett, J., Hubacek, K., Baiocchi, G., Paul, A., Dawkins, E, Briggs, J., Guan, D., Suh, S., & Ackermand, F. (2009). . Economic System Research, 21(3), 187–216.

In ’t Veld, D., & Wilting, H. 2024: PBL-FIGARO 2020. Version 2: 22 January 2024. [Unpublished dataset]. PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency.

Council of the European Union (2022). .

Remond-Tiedrez, I., & Rueda-Cantuche, J. M. (Eds.). (2019). . Publications Office of the European Union.

Government of the Netherlands (2019). . Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy.

Government of the Netherlands (2022). (Progress on climate goals). Accessed on 21 May 2024.

Ritchie, H., Rosado, P., & Roser, M. (2024, January). [Dataset]. Jones, M. W., Peters, G. P., Gasser, T., Andrew, R. M., Schwingshackl, C., Gütschow, J., Houghton, R. A., Friedlingstein, P., Pongratz, J., & Le Quéré, C. (2024). National contributions to climate change due to historical emissions of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide since 1850. Scientific Data, 10(1), 155. [Original data]. Accessed on 3 June 2024.

United Nations Environment Programme, & International Resource Panel (2024). . United Nations Environment Programme.

Wiedmann, T. (2009). . Economic System Research, 21(3), 175–186.

Walker, A., Zult, D., Hoekstra, R., van den Berg, M., & Dingena, G. (2017). . Statistics Netherlands.

Walker, A., Aerts, N., Kunkels, Y., Lemmers, O. van Leeuwen, E., & Wong, K.F. (2024). . Statistics Netherlands.

Walker, A., Zult, D., Schoenaker, N., & Lemmers, O. 2023. . [Dataset]. Statistics Netherlands.





Noten

These are imports for direct domestic consumption and intermediate imports used in products for domestic consumption – i.e. excluding intermediate imports destined for export.

This publication contains only the odd-numbered years, in this case 2021.

This is due to the fact that the source data, PBL-FIGARO and Eurostat-FIGARO, only contains 45 countries and ‘rest of the world’. This therefore means that a large part falls under ‘rest of the world’. In order to be able to better interpret this part, the GLORIA MRIO has been used. For more information, on this, see section 8.6 Data and methods.

This is due to the fact that the source data, PBL-FIGARO and Eurostat-FIGARO, only contains 45 countries and ‘rest of the world’. This therefore means that a large part falls under ‘rest of the world’. In order to be able to better interpret this part, the GLORIA MRIO has been used. For more information, on this, see section 8.6 Data and methods.

This is due to the fact that the source data, PBL-FIGARO and Eurostat-FIGARO, only contains 45 countries and ‘rest of the world’. This therefore means that a large part falls under ‘rest of the world’. In order to be able to better interpret this part, the GLORIA MRIO has been used. For more information, on this, see section 8.6 Data and methods.

This is due to the fact that the source data, PBL-FIGARO and Eurostat-FIGARO, only contains 45 countries and ‘rest of the world’. This therefore means that a large part falls under ‘rest of the world’. In order to be able to better interpret this part, the GLORIA MRIO has been used. For more information, on this, see section 8.6 Data and methods.Glossary

Biomass and the footprint of biomass

Biomass includes all plant or animal material, or material from other organic origin.

Examples include wood, agricultural crops and garden, fruit and vegetable waste, as well as vegetable oil and wool. While biomass serves as a key raw material for manufacturing products, it is of course also a finished product. The footprint of biomass is based on ‘extracted’ weight. Thus, no weight adjustment takes place to a product’s moisture content. As an example, while a strawberry contains more moisture than a grain, both are taken simply by weight.

CH 4

Methane (= marsh gas). CH4 is formed by incomplete combustion of fuels, leakage from the natural gas network and by fermentation, among other things. Other important sources of this gas include livestock farming and rice cultivation. Methane is a greenhouse gas contributor to global warming and the largest component of natural gas.

CO 2

Carbon dioxide. CO 2 is released, among other things, from the burning of the carbon element in fuels. It is a greenhouse gas whose increasing concentrations in the atmosphere contribute to an enhanced greenhouse effect, causing a further increase in global temperature.

CO 2 equivalents

In order to calculate the combined impact of the different greenhouse gas emissions, emission levels are converted into CO 2 equivalents. This conversion is based on the ‘Global Warming Potential’ (GWP), i.e. the measure of warming that is contributed by each gas to the greenhouse effect.

Greenhouse gas emissions are generally expressed in megatonnes of CO 2 equivalents (1 megatonne = 1 million tonnes = 1 billion kilograms). One kg of CO 2 equivalents equals the effect of one kg of CO 2 being emitted. According to the new IPCC regulatory standards, effective as of September 2022, the emission of one kg of nitrous oxide is equivalent to 265 kg of CO 2 equivalents, and the emission of one kg of methane is equal to 28 kg of CO 2 equivalents.

Consumption footprint

The Dutch consumption footprint comprises all greenhouse gas emissions emitted for the total Dutch consumption.

Control of enterprises

The control of enterprises is determined on the basis of the country where strategic decision-making takes place. This control lies with the Ultimate Controlling Institutional Unit (UCI). Foreign control means that the country of residence of the UCI is a country other than the Netherlands.

Direct domestic consumption

The Dutch household consumption, government consumption and investments made by households, government and enterprises.

Domestic exports (Dutch-manufactured exports)

Exports after production in the Netherlands, or after significant processing of foreign-produced goods (taking into account the level of adjustments in the product’s HS code). Re-exports and domestic exports combined constitute the basis of total Dutch export figures.

Dutch business economy

The General Business Register (ABR) is based on the Dutch Standard Industrial Classification (SBI), which classifies business units according to their main activity. The Dutch business economy comprises all enterprises listed in the Standard Industrial Classifications (Dutch SBI 2008) sections B up to and including N, exclusive of K plus S95. This delineation is referred to internationally as ‘non-financial business economy’.

This category is composed of the following sectors:

B Mining and quarrying

C Manufacturing

D Production and distribution of and trade in electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply

E Water supply; sewerage, waste and wastewater management and remediation services

F Construction

G Wholesale and retail trade; motor vehicle repair

H Transportation and storage

I Accommodation and food service activities

J Information and communication

L Renting, buying and selling of real estate

M Consultancy, research and other specialised business services

N Renting and leasing of tangible goods and other business support services

S95 Repair of personal and household goods

Emission coefficient

Emissions from an activity divided by its total output, i.e. emissions per unit of output.

Emissions trade balance

Emissions trade balance is the balance of the greenhouse gas footprint of imports minus the greenhouse gas footprint of exports.

Enterprise (business unit) or firm

The actual transactor in the production process, characterised by autonomy with respect to the decisions about that process and by offering its products to third parties.

An enterprise comprises one or several legal entities. A distinctive feature is the autonomy in the decision-making with regard to production taking place within this composite entity. The Dutch component of an entity whose activities extend across multiple countries is considered an enterprise in itself for the sake of national statistics.

Enterprise (enterprise group)

The statistical unit acting as the financial transactor. In operational terms, the enterprise group is defined as the most comprehensive collection of legal units established in the Netherlands over which control can be exercised and which is homogeneous by institutional sector. An enterprise group may consist of one or more business units. See also: Enterprise (business unit).

Entrepreneur

A person who works for his/her own account and risk in his/her own enterprise or practice (self-employed) or as a salaried director of his/her own enterprise (director-major shareholder).

Export earnings

The value of gross exports minus the consumption of imported raw materials, semi-manufactured goods and support services.

Exports

The sum of Dutch domestic exports and re-exports.

Footprint of imports

The Dutch footprint of imports comprises all greenhouse gas emissions emitted for the total Dutch imports. This therefore includes not only imports remaining in the Netherlands but also re-exports.

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)

An enterprise receiving direct investments from abroad is an enterprise in which a foreign investor holds at least 10% of the ordinary share capital or the voting rights, or the equivalent thereof. This involves having a controlling interest and substantial influence on the management of the enterprise. Direct investment consists of share capital, participating interests in group enterprises abroad and credit lending.

Foreign enterprise

A foreign enterprise is classified according to the country where it is ultimately controlled. This is done based on the Ultimate Controlling Institutional Unit (UCI). The UCI is defined as that enterprise which is placed higher up in the chain of control of the Dutch enterprise that is not under the ultimate control of any other company or enterprise. Foreign control means that the country of residence of the UCI is a country other than the Netherlands.

Foreign subsidiary

If a Dutch enterprise holds a majority stake in a foreign enterprise, this enterprise is a subsidiary of a Dutch enterprise, or a foreign enterprise under Dutch control. There is no minimum amount of investment or minimum share of voting rights in the foreign enterprise. Such investments abroad, made by an enterprise in the Netherlands and under Dutch control (Dutch multinational), are aimed at building up a lasting interest in a foreign enterprise.

Fossil fuels and the footprint of fossil fuels

Fossil fuels include petroleum, natural gas and coal. The material footprint only includes primary energy carriers. Primary energy carriers are extracted from nature. Secondary energy carriers make use of primary energy carriers and thus contribute to the material footprint.

FTE

A measure of labour volume, calculated by converting all full-time and part-time jobs to full-time jobs, also referred to as full-time equivalents (FTE).

Two half-time jobs (0.5 FTE each) add up to a labour volume of one labour year.

Greenhouse gases

Greenhouse gases absorb part of the heat that is emitted to Earth by solar radiation. Increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere means more heat is trapped, causing the Earth’s surface temperature to rise. This is referred to as the enhanced greenhouse effect. The main greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), HFCs, PFCs and SF6.

Gross domestic product (GDP)

GDP is a measure for the size of a country’s economy. This is calculated from the sum of the value added by enterprises, households and governments to the goods and services they have used in their production activities. This sum is referred to as the value added at basic prices. To arrive at GDP at market prices, the balance of taxes on production plus subsidies is added as well as the difference between the VAT attributed and VAT paid.

Import intensity

The import intensity ratio is an indicator of the degree of international competitive pressure in the local market. It is expressed as a percentage share which shows to what extent domestic demand for goods or services depends on foreign imports. The higher the import intensity ratio, the larger the contribution of imports in meeting the total demand for goods and services.

Imports

The sum of imports for domestic use and imports for re-export.

Imports for domestic use/consumption

Goods, destined for Dutch residents, transported from a foreign country into the economic territory of the Netherlands. Included are raw materials needed for processing in the production process, semi-manufactured goods, fuels and fixed assets earmarked for investment.

Imports for re-export

Goods transported via the Netherlands which are temporarily owned by a resident of the Netherlands and subsequently leave the Netherlands without having undergone any significant industrial processing.

Independent SMEs

Independent small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) comprise all businesses in the Netherlands owned by Dutch residents with total numbers of employed persons in the entire organisation falling below 250.

Independent SMEs with foreign subsidiaries

Independent small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with foreign subsidiaries comprise all Dutch-owned enterprises where the umbrella enterprise group has fewer than 250 employed persons and at least one subsidiary abroad.

Independent SMEs without foreign subsidiaries

Independent small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) without foreign subsidiaries comprise all Dutch-owned enterprises where the umbrella enterprise group has less than 250 employed persons and no subsidiaries abroad.

Intellectual property

A collective term for rights granted on detailed ideas and concepts for example patents, trademarks and copyrights.

Intermediate goods

Inputs in the production process, such as raw materials, semi-manufactured goods and fuels.

An intermediate product is used during the production process. It is often transformed and then incorporated into the end product. Intermediate goods are therefore used to produce other goods.

Intermediate imports

Intermediate imports involve the imports used as inputs in the production process.

These inputs include raw materials, semi-manufactured goods, fuels and services. An intermediate product is used during the production process. It is often transformed and then incorporated into the end product. Intermediate goods are therefore used to manufacture other goods or services.

Intermittent exporter

An enterprise is an intermittent exporter when it exports for at least one year and a maximum of two years in a four-year period. See also: perennial exporter.

International production chain (value chain)

An international production chain comprises all activities – in more than one country – that are required to deliver a product or service from the concept phase through the various production stages to end users and post-use processing.

International trade in goods

International trade in goods involves residents who deliver goods to locations abroad and vice versa. In intra-EU imports, this is the value of the goods including freight and insurance costs up to the Dutch border. In extra-EU imports, this is the value of the goods including freight and insurance costs up to the external border of the European Union. The export value is including freight and insurance costs up to the Dutch border. This is in line with the International Trade in Goods (ITG) statistics. The ITG source statistics use different concepts than the National Accounts. For instance, source statistics assume cross-border movement of goods, while economic ownership is leading for the National Accounts. Integration into the National Accounts also produces additional differences.

International trader

An international trader is an entrepreneur at the helm of an enterprise that imports and/or exports services and/or goods.

International trade in services International trade in services occurs when Dutch residents provide services to residents of another economy and vice versa. Services are products that are generally not tangible, such as transport services, business services and personal, cultural and recreational services. Dutch residents refers to enterprises and individuals that engage in economic activities from any location in the Netherlands that has been in use for more than one year.

Internationally trading enterprise

An enterprise that imports and/or exports services and/or goods.

Investments in tangible fixed assets

Goods which are purchased or produced in-company for use as capital assets in the production process. This includes goods that have a life span exceeding one year, such as buildings, dwellings, machinery, transport vehicles and the like.

Labour year

A measure of labour volume, calculated by converting all full-time and part-time jobs to full-time jobs, also referred to as full-time equivalents (FTE). Two half-time jobs (0.5 FTE each) add up to a labour volume of one labour year.

Land use footprint

The land use footprint of Dutch imports is the amount of land used to produce goods and services that are imported by the Netherlands.

Material footprint

The material footprint of Dutch imports is the amount (in terms of weight) of raw materials extracted for all goods and services imported.

Metals and the metal footprint

Metals are all chemical metals, such as iron, aluminium and copper. The metal footprint comprises the total metal ores required. Alloys such as steel contribute only their share of metal ore to the metal footprint.

Multifactor productivity (MFP)

Multifactor productivity is a measure of production (output) per unit of all inputs. This is different from labour productivity, which only presents output per hour worked. Multifactor productivity thus measures how efficiently the various production factors are combined to account for economies of scale, capacity utilisation rate and technological developments, for instance.

Multinational

An enterprise with a parent or subsidiary abroad. See also: foreign subsidiary.

N 2 O

Nitrous oxide (= laughing gas). N2O is formed during various chemical conversion processes, particularly in agriculture via denitrification processes reinforced by the application of manure and fertiliser and, in the production of nitric acid and in car catalysts. It is a powerful greenhouse gas contributor to global warming.

Non-metallic minerals and the footprint of non-metallic minerals

Other minerals include all naturally occurring inorganic substances that are non-metallic. Examples include chalk, limestone, salt and sand. The weight extracted contributes to the footprint, irrespective of how much moisture the product retains.

Non-multinational

Enterprises without a parent or subsidiary abroad.

Perennial exporter

An enterprise is a perennial exporter when it reports goods exports for at least three years in a four-year period. See also: intermittent exporter.

Quasi-transit trade

Quasi-transit trade involves the import of foreign goods that undergo little or no processing upon arrival in the Netherlands and are then forwarded again to a foreign country. The goods are owned by a foreign enterprise while they are in the Netherlands (as opposed to re-exports). Furthermore, at least one of the following administrative tasks must be completed in the Netherlands in order to be deemed quasi-transit trade:

Upon arrival in the Netherlands, goods from outside the EU are cleared through customs;

The goods leave the Netherlands and the EU and an export document is drawn up by customs;

The international goods are stored in the Netherlands for at least one day. This makes the owner subject to VAT and therefore the owner has to register for VAT.

The quasi-transit trade is not part of the Dutch trade figures, but is included in the European trade figures on Dutch trade (Eurostat). See also the term: transit trade.

Re-exports

Re-exports involve imported foreign goods which, after being imported into the Netherlands, undergo little or no significant processing before being exported from the Netherlands again. Unlike in quasi-transit trade, the goods are temporarily owned by a resident enterprise while in the Netherlands. Re-exports and domestic exports combined constitute the basis of total Dutch export figures.

Royalties

Royalties are remuneration payments for the ongoing use of someone else’s intellectual property rights. Examples of those rights include copyrights, trademark rights and patent rights.

Special Purpose Entity (SPE)

Subsidiaries of foreign enterprise groups which are established in the Netherlands where resources are collected from abroad and which, on their own account, lend funds abroad. Netherlands-based SPEs manage participations, royalties or film rights for the parent companies and/or act as important intermediaries in the financing activities of the parent companies in the context of mergers, acquisitions and capital increases. SPEs are typified by carrying out huge income and asset transactions which bear no comparison to their productive activities in the Netherlands. SPEs are usually established in the Netherlands for the purpose of gaining tax advantages, either in the Netherlands or in the country of the parent company.

Two-way trader

An enterprise or business establishment which both imports and exports either goods or services. This is unlike what is called a one-way trader, which is either a one-way importer or a one-way exporter.

Value added

The gross value added equals the production minus intermediate consumption, excluding deductible VAT.




