Article Content:
 Introduction

Did you know that a vast array of data is available about the Caribbean Netherlands? Figures on the population, economy, labor market, tourism and young people, for instance, covering all aspects of daily life on Bonaire, Saba and St Eustatius.

This compact and colorful book showcases a selection of that data. These figures are essential for policymaking, education and business. This year’s edition looks at each topic by means of a question. The answers relate to all three islands.

There are also QR codes that provide quick access to our online presence:

Our , our online database , our and accounts. There you will find much more information than we can cover in this short publication.

If you have any other questions which have not been included here, feel free to contact us.

This publication is available both in digital format and as a print version.

We hope that this publication will provide answers, ideas and insights, and inspire you to find out more about the Caribbean Netherlands.

Statistics Netherlands (CBS), December 2024



How CBS collects data

CBS collects as much information as possible from existing government and business registries. The use of this information is regulated by law, with top priority given to privacy and reliability. Additionally, CBS collects data through its own surveys, keeping in mind that it is required to minimize the administrative burden on businesses and citizens (from survey taking). CBS’ statutory task is to compile and publish the statistics that are mandatory.

60 percent from registers

60 percent of the figures collected and analyzed by CBS come from registers of authorities and businesses, such as the PIVA (population register), the Tax and Customs Administration, annual reports from businesses to calculate GDP, or data from energy companies on household and business energy consumption. The main advantage of using data from registers is that CBS does not need to contact individuals and businesses as often, which makes the survey process less intensive and time-consuming for everyone.

40 percent from surveys

40 percent of the figures are collected from businesses and citizens. This is done by means of surveys conducted mostly face-to-face or on a smaller scale online.

Combining all these data sources in an innovative and reliable way enables us to produce new, up-to-date, society-oriented and more detailed statistics, with a keen eye for privacy and reliability.

Facts that matter

CBS stands for a well-informed society, based on facts. CBS wants to contribute to this by providing the reliable, objective information that government and society require. In doing so, CBS contributes to the societal debate, research, policy development and decision making.



What was the population on 1 January 2024?

On 1 January 2024, the population of the Caribbean Netherlands stood at 30,397. That was an increase of 979 (3 percent) over the previous year. This increase was largely due to population growth on Bonaire, mainly as a result of migration. The population of Saba also grew due to an increase in net immigration. On St Eustatius, however, net migration was negative.

On 1 January 2024, the population of Bonaire stood at 25,133 inhabitants, which was 1,043 more (4 percent) than one year previously. This was mainly due to the fact that many more people came to live on the island than departed (941), and to a limited extent due to natural population growth (98, births minus deaths).

The number of people living on Bonaire who were born outside the Caribbean Netherlands rose by more than 1,000. This was mainly due to more residents who were born in the Dominican Republic, Colombia, Venezuela and the European Netherlands.

Population of St Eustatius decreased by 89

On 1 January 2024, St Eustatius had 3,204 inhabitants, down by 89 compared to the previous year (3 percent). That was mainly because more people left the island than settled there. Natural population growth was limited. The number of people living on St Eustatius who were born outside the Caribbean Netherlands decreased by 65. Specifically, the number of people living on St Eustatius who were born in the European Netherlands, the United States and the Dominican Republic declined.

Population of Saba increased by 25

The population of Saba stood at 2,060 on 1 January 2024. That was an increase of 25 (1 percent) over the previous year. More people came to live on the island than departed (60). Natural population growth was limited. The number of people on Saba born outside the Caribbean Netherlands rose by 34. These were mainly people born in Central and South America.

Source





How do we monitor well-being in the Caribbean Netherlands?

Most of us understand that money is not the only thing we need to lead a happy and healthy life. A secure income is important, of course, but many other factors also play a role, such as our health, relationships, and living environment. We refer to this set of factors as ‘well-being’.

In order to assess well-being, we look at three dimensions. Firstly, we look at the things that matter in the short term – i.e. people’s quality of life in the here and now. Secondly, we look at the extent to which our current lifestyle comes at the expense of future generations ( later ). Will our children be able to enjoy the same quality of life as we do today? Will there be enough human, social, economic, and natural resources left for them? And will these be distributed equally across the population? Thirdly, we look at how our prosperity affects that of people elsewhere in the world. In order to monitor all three dimensions, and thereby understand more about our well-being, Statistics Netherlands (CBS) publishes its annual Monitor of Well-Being and Sustainable Development Goals (MBW & SDGs).

Measuring well-being in the Caribbean Netherlands

Since 2022, Statistics Netherlands (CBS) has published its Monitor of Well-Being and Sustainable Development Goals for the Caribbean Netherlands, too. Wherever possible, well-being is assessed separately for each of the three islands – Bonaire, Saba, and St Eustatius. Various statistics from Statistics Netherlands (CBS) and other organizations are used in order to monitor well-being accurately over time. This means that statistics on society, the economy and the natural environment are brought together in one report, providing a comprehensive picture of well-being in the Caribbean Netherlands.

In order to interpret the Monitor of Well-Being and Sustainable Development Goals for the Caribbean Netherlands, the local specifics of the Caribbean Netherlands are explicitly taken into account. For example, when measuring the quality of the natural capital it makes little sense to look at forested areas, and when it comes to monitoring biodiversity, different species of animals and plants are relevant in the Caribbean Netherlands and the European Netherlands. The societal context is also different: for example, there is hardly any academic education on the islands, which means that residents who wish to pursue a university education have to leave the islands and by no means always return to the Caribbean Netherlands. Because of these differences, different indicators are used in the Caribbean region than in the European Netherlands.

Monitor of Well-Being, SDGs, and the Caribbean Netherlands

Statistics Netherlands (CBS) monitors well-being in the Caribbean Netherlands against the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) formulated by the United Nations. These are designed to ensure that as many people as possible in the world can enjoy a good quality of life. They are internationally defined goals that reflect all the environmental, social, and economic aspects of well-being.

On the basis of the SDGs, it is possible for Statistics Netherlands (CBS) to identify themes that are relevant to policy and politics in an objective and systematic manner. Long-term monitoring of changes in well-being is essential in this respect.

Monitor of Well-Being & SDGs under development

The Monitor of Well-Being and Sustainable Development Goals for the Caribbean Netherlands is still under development, and is expanded every year to provide an increasingly comprehensive picture of well-being across the islands. This process depends on the availability of good-quality data on the Caribbean Netherlands. For some important themes, including nature and biodiversity, and the emission of harmful substances, no suitable data sources are currently available. As soon as they become available, they will be added to the monitor. Statistics Netherlands (CBS) is committed to providing the most accurate picture possible of well-being in the Caribbean Netherlands.

Sources







How did purchasing power change in 2022?

Purchasing power in the Caribbean Netherlands declined in 2022, partly due to high inflation. On Bonaire, purchasing power declined by 4.2 percent, on St Eustatius by 3.3 percent and on Saba by 1.6 percent, relative to 2021. However, people receiving benefit payments on Bonaire and St Eustatius actually saw their purchasing power improve due to increases in those benefits and an energy allowance paid in 2022.

In order to combat poverty in the Caribbean Netherlands, since 2019, steps have been taken to increase minimum wages and benefits payments to pensioners (AOV), widows/widowers and orphans (AWW) and people receiving income support, in order to improve their purchasing power. In 2022, benefits and the minimum wage were increased to mitigate the effects of inflation in 2021, and people received an additional payment to compensate for higher costs.

Child benefit was also increased once again, and households receiving income support were paid an energy allowance. However, for the general population, these measures were not enough to make up for the average increase in prices in 2022. Inflation stood at 9.7 percent on Bonaire, 7.7 percent on St Eustatius and 8.6 percent on Saba. Median purchasing power fell on all three islands in 2022, following ten years of almost continuous increases.

Purchasing power improved for those receiving benefits

Households that rely on income support received an energy allowance in 2022 to help cover higher energy bills, in addition to the increase in benefits. On Bonaire and St Eustatius, this led to an improvement in the median purchasing power of benefits recipients by 2.2 and 2.5 percent, respectively. But on all three islands, median purchasing power declined for those living in households that earn their income primarily from paid employment. On Bonaire, the fall in purchasing power among working people was the highest at 4.9 percent. Among working people on St Eustatius and Saba, purchasing power fell by 4.1 percent and 1.7 percent, respectively.

The majority of people saw their purchasing power decline

When median purchasing power falls, this does not necessarily mean that everyone is affected. For example, purchasing power improved for at least 40 percent of islanders in 2022. Over 90 percent of residents of the Caribbean Netherlands are members of households that derive their income primarily from work. Despite the decline in the median purchasing power of this group, around 2 in 5 working people saw an improvement in their purchasing power. Conversely, the increase in median purchasing power among benefits recipients, who make up only 10 percent of the population, does not necessarily mean that the position of everybody in those households improved. A higher proportion of this group saw their position improve compared to working people. On St Eustatius, 3 out of 4 persons living in households that rely mainly on benefits for their income saw their position improve.

Source





How are the red-billed tropicbirds on St Eustatius doing?

Marine birds such as the red-billed tropicbird are among the most endangered bird species in the world. In the Caribbean region, various factors are having an adverse effect on nesting colonies of the red-billed tropicbird: coastal development, predation by non-native species (such as rats and cats), and site disturbance due to natural causes such as severe weather.

Although numerous seabirds visit St Eustatius, the red-billed tropicbird is the only species that actually nests on the island. This species lays a single egg each nesting season (between October and June). If a pair’s first attempt at breeding fails, they may lay a second egg if it is still early in the nesting season.

Hatching success is six in ten eggs on average

To find out more about the breeding success of the red-billed tropicbird, their nests have been monitored during every breeding seasons since 2013. Hatching success refers to the percentage of chicks that hatch (of the total number of eggs laid in a season) and is an indicator of the overall population trend. The survival rate of chicks into adulthood, however, is lower than the hatching success rate.

Hatching success has been relatively stable over time. The lowest recorded number was 34 chicks from 65 eggs laid (52 percent hatching success), which was in the 2022–’23 season. The average hatching success rate has been 61 percent, and the highest hatching success was achieved in 2017–’18 (79 percent). In the 2023–’24 season, hatching success was about average, at 60 percent.

Source





How many inhabitants will the Caribbean Netherlands have in 2035?

According to the most recent Population forecast, the population of the Caribbean Netherlands (Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba) is expected to reach 36.1 thousand in 2035, up by 19 percent from 2024. Bonaire’s population will grow the fastest and in 2035 it will also have the oldest population. The share of inhabitants of the Caribbean Netherlands who were born on the islands, or on Aruba, Curaçao or St Maarten, is expected to decrease on Bonaire and Saba until 2035 and to increase on St Eustatius.

On 1 January 2024, there were 30.4 thousand people living in the Caribbean Netherlands, most of whom were living on Bonaire. The majority of population growth is also expected on Bonaire, as has been the case since 2011. According to the forecast, the island will have 21 percent more inhabitants in 2035 than it has in 2024. An increase of 5 percent is expected on St Eustatius and 10 percent on Saba.

The population of the Caribbean Netherlands is ageing

In 2024, 14 percent of the population on Bonaire was 65 years or older, compared to 10 percent in 2011. The share of older people is expected to increase to 20 percent in 2035. Bonaire will be the island with the oldest population in the Caribbean Netherlands.

On St Eustatius, 14 percent of the population was 65 years or older in 2024. Saba was the island with the oldest population in 2024, with 16 percent of inhabitants being 65 years or older. On both islands, the share of people aged 65 or older is expected to increase to 19 percent in 2035.

Country of birth of inhabitants of the Caribbean Netherlands

Over the period 2018–2024, 56 percent of residents of Bonaire, 57 percent of residents of St Eustatius and 47 percent of residents of Saba were born in the Caribbean Netherlands or on Aruba, Curaçao or St Maarten. The largest decrease in the share of residents born on these islands is expected on Bonaire; a decrease is also expected on Saba, while an increase is expected on St Eustatius. In the period 2018–2024, nearly 16 percent of the population of Bonaire was born in the European Netherlands, which is a higher percentage than on St Eustatius and Saba. This situation is also expected in the future. Saba will then have a larger proportion of inhabitants born elsewhere, while on Bonaire and St Eustatius the proportion will be smaller and almost the same.

Most likely trajectory and uncertainties

In order to calculate the future trajectory of the population of the Caribbean Netherlands, Statistics Netherlands uses a simulation model that uses assumptions regarding births, deaths, immigration and emigration in the future. Migration to and from other countries is the most important component of population change on the three islands, and is particularly subject to fluctuations. In all probability, the actual population will therefore deviate from the forecast and the forecasts therefore remain uncertain.

Source



Relevant items

News item –



How many young people migrated in 2023?

In 2023, 2,288 people came to live in the Caribbean Netherlands, and 1,388 people left the region to live elsewhere. Net migration was therefore 900 people for all three islands.

Net migration for Bonaire in 2023 was 941, and for Saba it was 60. On St Eustatius, meanwhile, net migration was minus 101. On Bonaire and Saba, more young people and people over the age of 25 arrived on the islands than left. The opposite was true in the case of St Eustatius: more people left the island to live elsewhere than moved to the island.

New arrivals are relatively young

The age profile of immigrants is not quite the same as that of the general population. On Bonaire, for example, 26 percent of the population were under the age of 25 while this share is 29 percent among new arrivals to the island. On St Eustatius, 29 percent of both the general population and new arrivals were under the age of 25.

The difference is largest on Saba: 23 percent of the general population was under the age of 25, while 39 percent of new immigrants were in this age group. This is most likely because there is a medical university on Saba, which attracts a lot of young people to live there.

Those leaving the islands are also relatively young

The age profile of those leaving the islands to live elsewhere is also different from the age profile of the population as a whole. Among those emigrating from Bonaire in 2023, 40 percent were under the age of 25, on St Eustatius it was 42 percent, and on Saba 24 percent. Young people often leave the islands to pursue education elsewhere. In the case of Saba, young people also leave when they have completed medical school. The pattern is similar for Saba and St Eustatius: around 25 percent of emigrants in 2023 were under the age of 12, and 75 percent were aged between 12 and 25. Those leaving Bonaire were slightly younger, at 34 percent and 66 percent respectively. Saba has the highest proportion of people aged 18 to 24 years among both immigrants and emigrants (about 60 percent).

Source





What was the inflation rate?

Between the end of Q4 2023 and the end of Q2 2024, consumer prices for goods and services in the Caribbean Netherlands rose relative to the previous twelve-month period. This increase is indicated by the inflation rate, which is the annual rate of change in the consumer price index. Of the three islands, St Eustatius saw the lowest inflation rate, while it was highest on Saba.

In 2023, the average prices on Bonaire rose by 3.8 percent, while prices on St. Eustatius and Saba increased by 2.5 percent and 4 percent, respectively, relative to the previous year. On all three islands, the inflation rate was influenced by higher prices for housing, water and energy, transportation, and food. Additionally, health-related products and services became more expensive on Bonaire.

Prices for food and non-alcoholic beverages

Food prices continued to rise across the Caribbean Netherlands until Q1 2023, but dropped after that. On Bonaire, food prices increased by 5.5 percent in Q2 2024, year on year. That was less than the rise of 9.9 percent increase seen in Q2 2023, year on year.

On St Eustatius, food prices rose by 3.1 percent in the second quarter of 2024, year on year. On Saba, food prices increased by 4.0 percent in Q2 2024 year on year. Food inflation was therefore down from the 7.9 percent and 9.0 percent year-on-year increases seen in Q2 2023.

In other words, although prices rose in the first two quarters of 2024, they did so at a much slower rate than in 2023.

Prices for transportation services and petrol

Transportation prices include cars, fuel and airfares. In Q2 2024, transportation was 1.7 percent more expensive on Bonaire than one year previously; for Saba, the increase was 9.3 percent and for St Eustatius it was 8.4 percent.

Prices for petrol and air tickets, which have a significant impact on transportation costs, have been steadily increasing since Q3 2023. In Q2 2024, the year-on-year increase in petrol prices was 2.8 percent on Bonaire, 0.4 percent on St Eustatius, and 8.2 percent on Saba.

During the same period, air tickets were 0.8 percent cheaper on Bonaire, 17.6 percent more expensive on St Eustatius, and 7.3 percent more expensive on Saba, relative to one year previously.

Source





How many people travelled to and from the islands by air?

Nearly 504 thousand people passed through the airports of Bonaire, Saba and St Eustatius in 2023. That was 6 percent more than in 2022 and 10 percent more than in 2019. The number of aircraft movements to and from these airports was almost 15 percent higher than it was in 2022.

In 2023, more than 447 thousand passengers arrived at or departed from Flamingo Airport on Bonaire, which was 89 percent of all passengers in the Caribbean Netherlands. Passenger numbers at Flamingo Airport were up by nearly 4 percent on 2022 and by over 16 percent on 2019.

The runway at Flamingo Airport on Bonaire is 3 kilometres long, which makes it possible for larger aircraft to land there. The runways on Saba and St Eustatius are shorter, and so these islands are served by smaller aircraft.

Largest increase in air passengers on St Eustatius

More than 56 thousand travellers passed through the airports of St Eustatius and Saba in 2023. The largest increase in air passengers was at F.D. Roosevelt airport on St Eustatius. Nearly 32 thousand people flew to and from this island, a year-on-year increase of nearly 40 percent.

Nearly 25 thousand passengers flew to and from Saba, up by nearly 17 percent relative to 2022.

Over 25 percent more flights to and from Bonaire

More than 14.2 thousand flights were handled at Flamingo Airport on Bonaire in 2023, up by 27 percent on 2022. F.D. Roosevelt Airport on St Eustatius handled over 5 thousand flights, up by 6 percent on 2022.

There was less air travel to and from Saba in 2023 than in the previous year, however, Juancho E. Yrausquin Airport handled 3.6 thousand flights in 2023, which was down by 6.7 percent.

Bonaire to Amsterdam is the most popular route

Of all flights on Bonaire, 74 percent were between Bonaire and Curaçao, carrying 146 thousand passengers. Amsterdam Airport Schiphol ranked second, with 10 percent of all flights. However, the most passengers were carried between Bonaire and Amsterdam: 188 thousand, or 42 percent of the total number of passengers.

Flights from St Eustatius and Saba mainly flew to and from St Maarten (75 and 88 percent of all flights, and 89 and 94 percent of passengers, respectively).

Source





How did the economies perform in 2022?

In 2022, the economy of Bonaire grew by 8.8 percent. This growth was mainly driven by the accommodation and food services and recreation sectors. On Saba, the economy grew by 1.5 percent. On St Eustatius, the economy contracted by 11.0 percent, as turnover fell for some large businesses that depend heavily on the international oil market.

With the termination of all restrictions to limit the spread of coronavirus at the beginning of 2022, inbound tourism by air on Bonaire continued to increase from 111 thousand tourists in 2021 to 173 thousand in 2022. That was an increase of 55 percent and the number exceeded that of 2019, when 158 thousand tourists came to the island. This led to an increase in the value added of both the accommodation and food services and recreation sectors by over 45 percent on Bonaire.

The higher number of tourists combined with a 5.3 percent increase in the island's population also boosted the value added of the trade sector on Bonaire. Supermarkets in particular performed well in 2022.

Sharp decline on St Eustatius

On St Eustatius, the contraction in GDP of 11 percent was mainly related to a few large businesses on the island. Their output is mainly export-oriented and dependent on oil demand in the region. Demand for these businesses’ products and services fell in 2022. Although the number of tourists increased by more than 50 percent to 5.6 thousand, the additional demand created by this in the trade and accommodation and food services sectors in particular was insufficient to compensate for the contraction of large businesses in the oil sector.

Economic recovery continues on Saba after the coronavirus crisis

Saba's inbound tourism increased from 4.0 thousand tourists in 2021 to 4.9 thousand in 2022. That was an increase of 22.5 percent. However, the number is still considerably lower than it was in 2019, when 8.8 thousand tourists visited the island. As tourism recovered, the value added of the accommodation and food services and recreation sector increased.

Source





How much do people earn, on average?

The average annual wage of workers on Bonaire was 27.0 thousand US dollars in 2022. That was an increase of 5.4 percent over 2021. On St Eustatius, the average annual wage was 35.3 thousand US dollars and on Saba it was 35.5 thousand US dollars. Between 2011 and 2022, wages on Bonaire increased by 2.4 percent. On St Eustatius the increase was 1.8 percent and on Saba it was 2.7 percent.

In 2022, the highest average annual wages on Bonaire were recorded in the financial services sector (45.0 thousand US dollars). Other sectors with annual wages of over 40.0 thousand US dollars were energy, water supply and waste management, public administration and education.

The lowest average wages (less than 20.0 thousand US dollars) were paid in the business services and accommodation and food services sectors.

Source





By how much have house prices risen on Bonaire?

In 2022, house prices on Bonaire reached their highest level since they were first measured in 2011. During this period, home values rose by 79.3 percent. In 2022, prices increased by 20.2 percent year on year, and total house sales rose from 135.2 million dollars to 136.4 million dollars.

However, the number of transactions on the island did not increase in 2022. A total of 333 homes were sold, compared with 351 in 2021, which means that the total number of transactions actually dropped by 5.1 percent. Generally, the number of mortgages is higher than the number of housing transactions. This is because people sometimes refinance their current mortgage, take out an additional mortgage for renovations, or buy a vacant lot (which is excluded from housing transactions).

The numbers of housing transactions and mortgages were approximately the same in 2021, but in 2022 there was a slight divergence.

Variations in number of dwellings sold in each district

In some districts, the number of transactions increased compared to 2021. This was the case in the Entrejol and Tera Cora districts, where the number of transactions increased by 39 percent and 11 percent, respectively.

In the districts of Nikiboko and Playa, on the other hand, the number of transactions decreased by 34 percent and 33 percent respectively, relative to 2021.

Source







Noten

The peak in Tera Cora in 2018 was caused by the completion of a new housing project.How are the islands’ built-up areas changing over time?

There has been significant population growth and an expansion of tourism on Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba over the years. Homes have been built to house the islands’ residents and more hotels, bars and restaurants have been developed to accommodate the growing number of tourists.

Most people live and work in built-up areas. These consist of homes, shops and offices, as well as traffic infrastructure and construction sites. But built-up areas have an adverse effect on the natural environment because of the destruction of habitats, reduced ground permeability, higher volumes of traffic, and the increased consumption of natural resources.

A global built-up area dataset was used to calculate the proportion of the islands that is covered by built-up areas based on satellite imaging. This is done every five years. The bar graph below shows the percentage of built-up area relative to the total area of each island.

St Eustatius has the most built-up area relative to its size

Although Bonaire has the largest population of the three islands, followed by St Eustatius, and then Saba, this is not reflected in the percentage of built-up area on the islands. St Eustatius has consistently had the highest proportion of built-up area, followed by Saba. Bonaire has the least built-up area relative to its size. Bonaire has also experienced the steadiest rate of increase in built-up area over the decades, while the trend on both Saba and St Eustatius has fluctuated more over the years.

Between 1975 and 2020, Bonaire and Saba saw a similar overall increase in the amount of built-up area: 6.1 percent, and 7.5 percent respectively. St Eustatius, by contrast, experienced a higher increase of 13.0 percent.

Source





How much of the islands’ electricity comes from renewable sources?

In 2023, electricity production from renewable sources such as water, wind, and sun amounted to 35 million kWh on Bonaire. On St Eustatius, 5.1 million kWh of renewable electricity was produced and on Saba it was 3.1 million kWh. The production of renewable electricity increased on all three islands in 2023, relative to 2022.

Electricity production from renewable sources increased by 5 percent on Bonaire in 2023 compared with 2022. On St Eustatius and Saba, the production of electricity from renewable sources also increased by 4 percent and 8 percent, respectively.

Most renewable electricity on Bonaire came from wind power

In 2023, total electricity production on Bonaire was 156.2 million kWh, up by 11 percent on 2022. About 22 percent of that (35 million kWh) was renewable.

Almost three-quarters of the renewable electricity generated was produced by wind turbines and 14 percent by solar farms. Another 18 percent was generated by solar panels on the roofs of houses and businesses. The production of electricity from solar power in 2023 was almost 20 times higher than in the previous year, partly due to a new solar farm that began producing electricity in the summer of 2023. Electricity generated from wind power fell by 12 percent.

In 2014, the share of renewable electricity on Bonaire was the highest of all the islands at 41 percent. That was partly due to the number of wind hours, which was higher than it was in other years. In recent years, the share of renewables has varied between 20 and 30 percent. Electricity from renewable sources has been generated on Bonaire since 2007. Since 2016, electricity generated from solar power in particular, has increased as well as wind power.

Solar farm on St Eustatius meets the island’s daytime needs

In 2023, 17.1 million kWh of electricity was produced on St Eustatius. Of this, 5.1 million kWh (30 percent) was renewable.

The solar farm on St Eustatius meets all the island’s electricity needs during the day. In the evening and at night, and during cloudy weather conditions, the system automatically switches to diesel generators to produce electricity.

Electricity production from renewable sources on Saba increased last year

Total electricity production on Saba was 9.8 million kWh in 2023, 4 percent higher than in 2022. More than a third of total electricity production on Saba (3.1 kWh) came from renewable sources in 2023, up by 8 percent on 2022.

On Saba, electricity from renewable sources is produced by solar farms. Saba now has two solar farms. The first has been operational since February 2018 and the second since February 2019.

Source





How many tourists arrived by air?

In 2023, a total of 182.6 thousand tourists flew to the islands of the Caribbean Netherlands. That was just over one thousand fewer than in 2022. The increase in tourist arrivals by air on Bonaire came to a halt, while in 2022 it rose by more than 50 percent compared with 2021. Inbound tourism by air on Saba and St Eustatius recovered partially, but has not yet returned to pre-pandemic levels.

In 2023, 171.1 thousand tourists visited Bonaire by air, compared with 173.2 thousand in the previous year. Ten years earlier, this was 31 percent.

In the last quarter of 2023, 44 thousand tourists visited the island by air, which was down 6 percent year on year.

Tourist arrivals by air on St Eustatius up by 50 percent in 2023

The number of tourists travelling to St Eustatius by air in 2023 increased to 5.8 thousand, or around 4 percent, compared with the previous year. In 2013, nearly 50 percent fewer tourists visited St Eustatius than in 2023. The number of visitors by air has not returned to the pre-pandemic levels of 2019.

In Q4 2023, 1.8 thousand tourists visited the island by air. That was 6 percent more than in 2022.

Tourism by air on Saba not yet back to pre-pandemic levels

Saba saw an increase in visitors by air of 16 percent (to a total of 5.7 thousand) last year. Relative to 2013, over 40 percent fewer tourists visited Saba. Just as in St Eustatius, inbound tourism by air has not returned to the pre-pandemic levels seen in 2019.

In the last quarter of 2023, 1.4 thousand tourists visited the island by air, the same number as one year previously.

Drop in number of tourists with Dutch nationality visiting Bonaire

The share of tourists with Dutch nationality arriving in Bonaire by air – visitors from the European Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and St Maarten – fell from 71 percent in 2021 to 64 percent in 2022. This remained unchanged in 2023. The relative share of tourists with Dutch nationality has fallen in recent years due to an increase in visitors from the United States. In 2023, the share of visitors with Dutch nationality also dropped on St Eustatius, while it remained the same on Saba. In absolute numbers, the number of tourists with Dutch nationality arriving in Bonaire has actually increased in recent years, from approximately 79 thousand in 2021 to 109 thousand in 2023.

Some of the tourists with Dutch nationality are residents of Aruba, St Maarten and Curaçao. In 2023, 16 percent of inbound tourists flying to Bonaire were living on one of the islands. In 2022, that share was 10 percent.

Source





How long do immigrants stay on Bonaire, St Eustatius, and Saba?

Between 2011 and 2016, 8.7 thousand people who were not born in the Caribbean part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands came to live in the Caribbean Netherlands. The majority of immigrants moved to Bonaire (5.7 thousand people), followed by Saba (2.0 thousand people), and St Eustatius (1.0 thousand people). Most of these new arrivals had left again within seven years.

On Bonaire, residents born outside the region were mainly born in the European Netherlands (2.7 thousand) and Central and South America (1.7 thousand). On St Eustatius, residents born outside the region were mainly from Central and South America (398) and the European Netherlands (249); on Saba, meanwhile, they were mainly from North America (942).

More than half of new arrivals leave within seven years

Of new arrivals who came to live on Bonaire between 2011 and 2016, just over half left again within seven years. The largest group were immigrants from the European Netherlands (61 percent left within seven years), followed by immigrants from Central and South America (29 percent).

On St Eustatius, 65 percent of new arrivals left the island within seven years. Of these, the largest group came from the European Netherlands (59 percent), followed by Central and South America (50 percent).

On Saba, 85 percent of new arrivals left the island within seven years. 92 percent of new arrivals from North America left the island within that period of time.

Quarter of new arrivals in Bonaire and St Eustatius leave after one year

Of the 2,946 immigrants who came to live on Bonaire between 2011 and 2016 and left within seven years, a quarter (720) left after having lived on the island for one year. A small proportion left within a year.

Of the 687 new arrivals who left St Eustatius, a quarter (167) left after having lived on the island for one year.

New arrivals in Saba stayed the shortest time, on average. Of all immigrants (1,719) who arrived in Saba between 2011 and 2016, more than half (969) had left after one year.

Source







Noten

The Caribbean part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands comprises:

the countries of Aruba, Curaçao and St Maarten; and

the 3 public bodies of Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba (the Carribbean Netherlands).How does CBS handle your privacy

CBS treats your personal data with the utmost care. Individual persons are never identifiable or traceable in the statistics or publications. We also have measures in place to prevent the theft, loss or misuse of personal data. CBS will never supply identifiable data at personal level to third parties, including other government institutions.

CBS protects your data with technical and logistical measures. Rules in the organization also ensure good data protection. Following are the most important measures:

When you complete a survey or submit any data, this information is delivered to CBS in encoded form. The data are received by CBS in a secured environment. Only authorised personnel who require the data for their work shall have access to these data.

At the earliest possible stage in the process, all directly identifiable personal data are removed from the files. This means datasets for research will never contain any data such as names, addresses or citizen identification numbers.

Every CBS employee is required to observe the strictest standards of confidentiality and has signed a confidentiality agreement to this effect.

CBS only uses the data for statistical and scientific purposes. CBS is excluded by law from using the data for fiscal, administrative, verification and legal purposes. Furthermore, data are never used for marketing purposes.

All statistical processes at CBS are certified in terms of personal data protection. This privacy proof audit is carried out by an accredited external party.

Source





Sources

What was the population on 1 January 2024?

StatLine –

StatLine –

StatLine –

How do we monitor well-being in the Caribbean Netherlands?

Visualisations –

How did purchasing power change in 2022?

StatLine –

How are the red-billed tropicbirds on St Eustatius doing?

Dutch Caribbean Biodiversity Database –

BioOne –

How many inhabitants will the Caribbean Netherlands have in 2035?

Background –

Table –

How many young people migrated in 2023?

Statline –

What was the inflation rate?

StatLIne –

How many people travelled to and from the islands by air?

StatLine –

StatLine –

How did the economies perform in 2022?

StatLine –

How much do people earn, on average?

StatLine –

By how much have house prices risen on Bonaire?

StatLine –

How are the islands’ built-up areas changing over time?

GHSL –

How much of the islands’ electricity comes from renewable sources?

StatLine –

How many tourists arrived by air?

StatLine –

How long do immigrants stay on Bonaire, St Eustatius, and Saba?

StatLine –

StatLine –

StatLine –




