Article Content:
 Introduction

The Netherlands in Numbers is based on a series of questions about the Netherlands, past and present. The answers are provided in the form of 35 infographics. This web publication accompanies the printed booklet with the same title, and delves deeper into each question by providing more text, charts and analysis.

Interesting facts about the Netherlands

Statistics Netherlands (CBS) has a myriad of data on our country. This publication showcases a tiny selection of that in a colourful and accessible way. The infographics provide the answers to 35 different questions, accompanied by analysis, graphs and maps. Readers wanting more detail can find this by following the links for more figures.

125 years of reliable statistics

Statistics Netherlands (CBS) is the ultimate independent source of reliable, socially relevant statistical data and information. This year marks our 125th anniversary. The figures that we provide are accessible to everyone and always up to date. They provide valuable insights into our society, enabling evidence-based decision-making and facilitating progress.

Population statistics are a good example. The way in which we count the number of people living in our country has evolved hand in hand with CBS as an institution. In 1899, we were still counting the 5 million people who lived in our country by hand, knocking on doors. Now, in 2024, this process is fully automated and our ten-year census is based on existing digital data sources.

This is a wonderful example of how statistics have moved with the times. We expect to count the Netherlands’ 18‑millionth resident in 2024.

CBS has been compiling annual figures and yearbooks for quite some time already. The first ‘Statistical Pocket Yearbook’ was published in 1924 and was mainly designed to provide policymakers with statistics about the Netherlands. But in the internet age, a printed book containing figures only was no longer relevant. Since 2020, we have published ‘The Netherlands in Numbers’, consisting entirely of infographics, each of which provides the answer to a particular question. Next to each infographic there is a QR code that links to the web publication with more information, graphs and tables on that subject.

This year marks 125 years since CBS was first established, and the 2024 edition of of ‘The Netherlands in Numbers’ therefore includes a number of special timelines. These show very clearly how long CBS has been producing reliable, unbiased statistics for the Netherlands. That is something we are truly proud of.

More information

The presents news items on the latest figures almost every day. It also features dossiers and dashboards on themes like the economy and society, and of course more information about CBS as an organisation. The figures can all be found on . And for more infographics, animations and videos, you can also follow CBS on X.

We hope you will enjoy this fourth edition of ‘The Netherlands in Numbers’!

The questions









































































How fast is our population growing?

Since 2010, the Dutch population has grown by an average of almost 0.6 percent a year. In 2024, a new milestone was reached when the population surpassed 18 million. A little more than eight years ago, the population of the Netherlands reached 17 million. It took a relatively long time – 15 years – to go from 16 million to 17 million inhabitants. The population of the Netherlands is growing as people move to the Netherlands from abroad and as we live for longer. We are expected to pass the 19 million mark in 2037.

In recent years, the population grew mainly due to immigration (people moving to the Netherlands from abroad), with a peak in 2022 due to the arrival of refugees from Ukraine. In 2020, there was a drop in immigration because of the coronavirus pandemic, and the difference between the number of immigrants and emigrants (people who moved abroad) was smaller.

In the past two years, the annual number of deaths was higher than the annual number of births for the first time.

How much does the population grow in one day, on average?

On an average day in 2023, about 451 children were born and 464 people died. Meanwhile, an average of 920 immigrants entered the Netherlands and 543 people moved abroad. On balance, the population of the Netherlands grew by an average of 361 people per day.

Who is the Netherlands’ 18‑millionth resident?

The identity of the 18‑millionth resident of the Netherlands is unknown. It could be a new baby, a refugee from Ukraine or Syria, a worker from Poland, a student from China or a Dutch citizen who came back home after living abroad for a while. But the person in question is more likely to be an immigrant than a new-born baby: in 2023, nearly 336 thousand immigrants registered with a municipality and over 164 thousand children were born. New immigrants also outnumbered new babies in early 2024.

The 18‑millionth resident is most likely to be an immigrant of Ukrainian, Polish, Syrian or Dutch origin. However, if it was a new-born baby, the mother is likely to be of Dutch origin, which was the case for two-thirds of babies born in 2023.

The 18‑millionth resident is slightly more likely to be a man or a boy than a woman or a girl. In recent years, 51 percent of immigrants were male and 51 percent of babies were boys.

Sources

StatLine –

StatLine –

StatLine –

StatLine –

Relevant links

Visualisation –

News release –

News release –



How many people provide informal care?

In the Netherlands in 2023, 13 percent of people aged 16 years and over were providing informal care. A total of 1.9 million people provided care to a family member or somebody else for 13 hours a week, on average. Women were more likely to provide informal care than men.

Informal caregivers provide unpaid care to somebody who is suffering from a long-term illness, is in need of help or is disabled. Somebody who has done this for at least 3 months or for 8 hours per week is classed as an informal caregiver. The care provided may consist of assistance with household tasks, washing and dressing, keeping the person company, or handling financial tasks.

The number of informal caregivers has fallen slightly since 2020, relative to previous years. In 2015–2019, approximately 14 to 15 percent of the population were informal caregivers, while in 2022–2023 it was 13 percent. However, informal carers now spend slightly more time providing care. In 2023, that was 13 hours per week on average, up from 11 hours in 2015.

Women more likely to be informal caregivers

Women were more likely to provide informal care than men. Of all women aged 16 and over, 15 percent provided care to a family member or acquaintance in 2023, while for men the share was 10 percent. Women also spent more time (14 hours per week) providing informal care than men (12 hours per week), on average.

Nearly 4 in 10 children of older people provide informal care

Children of older people were more likely to provide informal care than in previous years. In 2022, 37 percent of people with a parent aged 80 or over provided informal care, while ten years previously that was 32 percent. Daughters were more likely to provide informal care than sons and were also more likely to experience a heavy care burden. In 2022, 9 percent of women with parents aged 80 and over experienced a heavy care burden, while among men the share was 4 percent.

Children who live closer to their parents are more likely to provide informal care

Children with parents aged 80 or over who live nearby were more likely to provide informal care than those who live further away. For example, 43 percent of those whose parents live less than 5 km away provided informal care. Among those with parents living 50 km or more away, the share was 25 percent. People with no siblings were more likely to provide informal care than people with siblings. They were also more likely to experience a heavier burden of care.

Sources

News release –

StatLine –



How many people attend concerts and performances?

A total of 17.0 million people attended concerts and performances at professional theatres and venues in the Netherlands in 2022. Over half of all these visits were to concerts, which attracted a total of 9.6 million people. These were mainly pop concerts.

In the first three months of 2022, restrictions to limit the spread of coronavirus were still in force and these significantly impacted professional theatres and venues. When venues were allowed to reopen at the end of January, it took some time for the number of visitors to return to previous levels. For example, there were shorter opening hours and fixed seating arrangements, people had to wear face masks and take a health check at the entrance, and a maximum number of visitors was allowed into each venue. By mid-March 2022, these restrictions were made advisory only.

Fewer visitors than before the coronavirus pandemic

The number of visits to concerts and performances was 12 percent lower in 2022 than in 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic. That year, a total of 19.4 million people attended performances. In 2020, the number fell to 5.3 million and by 2021 it had dropped even further to 4.1 million. The largest decline during the pandemic was seen at pop concerts, which attracted 7.5 million people in 2019 and only 1.8 million in 2020.

Fewer performances and concerts

There were also fewer performances and concerts in 2022 than before the pandemic. In 2019, there were 54 thousand performances and concerts, while in 2022 there were over 50 thousand. However, that was still twice as many as during the pandemic.

Pop concerts in Amsterdam attract the most visitors

A relatively high number of performances are held in venues and theatres in Amsterdam. In 2022, the figure was 8.7 thousand, approximately 17 percent of the total. The city also attracts a large share of the total number of visitors to performances: nearly 32 percent. And concerts held in Amsterdam are also more likely to be full: 16 percent of pop concerts are held in Amsterdam, but these attract 41 percent of all visitors.

Source

Table –

Relevant link

News release –





Notes

Visits

CBS compiles figures on the number of visits made to performances and concerts, but these are not necessarily unique persons or visitors. These are visits to professional performances intended for general audiences. They would not include a visit to a school musical put on by pupils in the last year of primary school, for instance, or to a performance by an amateur theatre or ballet school.

Professional venues

These are businesses or organisations that manage one or more venues and create the programme. It involves visits to professional performances intended for general audiences. Performances and concerts in stadiums, event halls and exhibition halls were also included in the figures on the number of performances and visits. Data on festivals and amateur performances are not included in these figures.How often do people eat meat with their main meal?

Adults in the Netherlands eat meat with 63 percent of all their main meals. That means that out of 7 main meals per week, they eat an average of 4.4 meals with meat. Of the remaining main meals, 1.8 are vegetarian or fully plant-based (vegan), and 0.8 meals include fish. The main meal is the most important meal of the day, and many people eat it in the evening.

Men are more likely to eat meat with their main meal than women, and women are more likely to eat vegetarian or vegan meals. Both are just as likely to eat a meal with fish. The biggest difference between men and women is in the 18–24 age group, in which 71 percent of main meals eaten by men include meat, and 19 percent are vegetarian meals. Women in that age group eat meat with 60 percent of their main meals, and 31 percent are vegetarian. On average, men eat 81 grams of meat per day with their main meal, and women eat 52 grams.

Older people in particular are eating less meat

Among those aged 18 and older, 35 percent said they had started eating less meat over the past year, while 2 percent stated they had actually eaten more meat than before. Older people were more likely to say they started to eat less meat, while younger people were somewhat more likely to say they had eaten more. The percentage of people not eating meat is highest in the 24–34 age group.

Eating less meat for the sake of the climate and the environment

Concern about the impact of meat on the climate is the most frequently mentioned reason for giving up meat or eating less meat. Health benefits and animal welfare are also mentioned relatively often (18 percent in both cases). Among those aged over 75, the health benefits are the most frequently cited reason for eating less meat or none at all. Concerns about the climate and the environment play less of a role for this age group than other age groups. For younger age groups, the cost of meat is a more common reason for eating less meat or no meat than for older age groups.

7 in 10 adults not prepared to stop eating meat

Among adults aged 18 and older who eat meat, 34 percent said they should consume less meat, while 70 percent said they would not be prepared to stop eating meat. Adults aged under 55 are more likely to say they should eat less meat than those aged 55 and over. At the same time, they are also slightly more likely to say they do not want to give up meat: this number ranges from 64 percent in the 65–74 age group to 74 percent in the 25–34 age group.

Relevant links

RIVM –

News release –



How much debt does the Netherlands have?

At the end of 2023, government debt in the Netherlands stood at 481 billion euros. That was 45.1 percent of annual economic output (GDP) and comfortably within the European requirement that member state public debt should not exceed 60 percent of annual economic output.

In 2005, the Netherlands’ government debt was 275 billion euros. Public debt rises when a government spends more than it receives in revenue. Inflation means that in real terms the amount owed shrinks over time: a debt incurred in 2005 is worth less in 2023, for example.

Ratio of debt to economic output

To look at changes in public debt over the years, we often calculate the ratio of debt to economic output of a given country. This is known as the debt-to-GDP ratio. The larger a country’s economy, the lower its debt-to-GDP ratio for a given amount of debt, and the more easily the government will be able to pay off that debt in the future. In the Netherlands, public debt as a percentage of GDP (gross domestic product: an indicator of the size of a country’s economy) stood at 50 percent in 2005.

Debt-to-GDP ratio rises during periods of economic difficulty

During an economic downturn, the debt-to-GDP ratio will generally rise as the government receives less in revenues but spends more. The contrary is generally true during better economic times: borrowing tends to fall as tax revenues rise, and spending falls on items such as unemployment benefits. In 2020, when the coronavirus pandemic began, the government borrowed money to support businesses and allocated more funding to healthcare. At the same time, it also had to borrow money because of lower tax receipts. The debt-to-GDP ratio jumped as a result, and this was compounded by the fact that economic output also contracted that year. In subsequent years, economic growth resumed, inflation began to rise and tax receipts also rose sharply. This took the Netherlands’ debt-to-GDP ratio to 45.1 percent in 2023, the lowest level in 15 years.

Dutch government debt is well within European limits

There are risks associated with a debt burden that is too large in relation to the size of a country’s economy. When this situation arises, the country concerned runs the risk of not being able to pay back its debt over time. The 20 European countries that have adopted the euro as their currency have all agreed that public debt should not exceed 60 percent of GDP. This is one of the requirements of the European Stability and Growth Pact. In 2023, the Netherlands’ public debt was comfortably within that limit.

Of the 20 countries that make up the eurozone, eight currently meet the requirement for public debt. Estonia has the lowest debt-to-GDP ratio. Twelve countries do not meet the standard, and the public debt of five countries actually exceeds their annual economic output. The average debt-to-GDP ratio for the eurozone as a whole is nearly 89 percent.

Sources

StatLine –

StatLine –

Eurostat –





Notes

European standard on public debt and public deficits

Under the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), all euro area countries are required to aim for a government deficit of no more than 3 percent of GDP, and public debt of no more than 60 percent of GDP.

These standards form the basis of European budgetary rules for member states. However, in 2020, the European Commission decided to suspend the enforcement of these rules due to the coronavirus crisis. Following the outbreak of war in Ukraine and the energy crisis, the suspension of the budget rules was extended into 2023.How many people live alone?

A total of 3.3 million Dutch people were living alone at the start of 2024. That is almost 1 in 5 of the population. Even so, the majority do share their homes with other people – usually with a partner or as part of a family with children or (less often) as part of a single-parent family. Some people cohabit with a brother or sister, and a small proportion of people live in institutions.

The largest group of people living alone are women aged 70 and older. They are often left living alone after the death of a partner. A relatively high number of twenty-somethings also live alone, and slightly more men than women. Among those in their 30s and 40s, men living alone are clearly in the majority. This is partly because they are more likely to live alone following a divorce, while children are more likely to continue living with their mother.

These figures are based on people’s registered home addresses. A person can only be officially resident at one address, so there is no information on whether children with divorced parents also spend some of their time with their father, for instance. Some people who live alone also have a partner. In 2023, a quarter of those aged between 18 and 79 who live alone said they were in a steady relationship. Twenty-somethings living alone were the most likely to report this (38 percent), while those aged 65 to 79 are the least likely to (10 percent).

Number of people living alone began to rise in the 1970s

Around the middle of the last century, it was much more unusual for people to live alone. In 1960, for instance, 387 thousand people lived alone – just 3 percent of the population. That proportion began to rise in the 1970s, passing 10 percent by the mid-1980s. At that time, over 1.5 million people were living alone. At the beginning of 2024, 19 percent of the population, or 3.3 million people, lived alone.

Since the 1970s, it has become more common for young adults not to marry or not to move in with a partner as soon as they leave home. Divorce has also become more common. Another factor contributing to the rise in the number of people living alone is the fact that our population is ageing and older people often continue to live independently for longer following the loss of a partner.

Source

StatLine –

Relevant link

Population dashboard –



How old are motorcyclists and their motorbikes?

Motorcyclists are most often aged between 45 and 65 years old. At the beginning of 2024, almost half of the 684 thousand privately owned motorcycles were registered to someone in this age group. Another 108 thousand motorcycles were owned by someone over the age of 65. The bikes owned by this group also tend to be older: a quarter were 40 years old or older. The 23 thousand motorcyclists aged under 25, on the other hand, were more likely to own newer models.

In 2024, motorcycle ownership had increased across all age groups compared to five years earlier, with the exception of the 45–54 age group. The over-65s in particular are increasingly likely to own a motorcycle: the number of motorcycle owners in this aged group rose from 70 thousand in 2019 to 108 thousand in early 2024. Within this group, 17 thousand bikes were registered to people in the 75–84 age group, up 80 percent compared with five years earlier.

The number of motorcycles owned by young people aged 18–24 years old has also grown in recent years, reaching 23 thousand at the start of 2024. That is up by 30 percent since the start of 2019.

Motorcycle ownership highest in Drenthe

Zuid-Holland is the province with the highest number of motorcycles registered to private individuals (117 thousand), followed by Noord-Brabant (106 thousand). But relative to the number of residents aged 18 or over, the province of Drenthe tops the list with 68 motorcycles per thousand adults. Meanwhile, Zuid-Holland is at the bottom with around 38 bikes per thousand adults.

The municipality with the most registered motorcycles relative to its population is Ameland, where 106 out of every thousand adults own a bike. Schiermonnikoog has the lowest number of motorcycles per thousand inhabitants: just under 21.

Sources

StatLine – (only available in Dutch)

StatLine –



How many girls are suspected of crimes?

In 2023, 4.2 thousand girls aged between 12 and 17 were recorded as criminal suspects, out of a total of 17 thousand young people suspected of crimes. Shoplifting was a particularly common crime for young suspects, both male and female. Relatively few young females were suspected of violent crimes, traffic offences or drug offences, by contrast.

In 2023, the number of young females aged 12–17 suspected of a crime fell by 8 percent relative to 2022, when it had increased by 47 percent. Young males were more likely to be suspected of a crime; however, while juvenile criminality has been decreasing since 2019, it has risen among young females.

A total of 1.4 percent of all young people in the 12–17 age group were suspected of a crime in 2023, a drop of 10 percent since 2019.

Shoplifting is the most common crime

In 2023, young people of both sexes were the most likely to be suspected of shoplifting or some other crime involving property. The number of young females suspected of shoplifting fell by 13 percent, following an increase of 70 percent the previous year.

In total, nearly 6 thousand young people aged under 18 were suspected of shoplifting in 2023. For certain juvenile crimes, including burglary, firearms offences and drugs-related crimes, the suspects were overwhelmingly male.

Relatively high incidence of juvenile crime in large cities

In relative terms, juvenile suspects are more likely to live in large cities. For example, in Amsterdam there were 252 criminal suspects per 10 thousand residents in the 12–17 age group in 2023. In Rotterdam the number was 218, which is also relatively high. Other areas with a relatively high juvenile crime rate are Middelburg, Zaanstad, Leidschendam-Voorburg and Nissewaard. But the municipality of Voorst in Gelderland had the highest number of criminal suspects per 10 thousand residents aged 12–17, at 306.

Hof van Twente and Tubbergen registered the lowest number of juvenile criminal suspects, at 33 per 10 thousand residents. The second lowest were Hellendoorn, Beekdaelen and Duiven, each with 35 criminal suspects per 10 thousand residents aged 12–17.



How much energy is consumed in the Netherlands?

The Netherlands consumed over 2,600 PJ (petajoules) of energy in 2023, including industry, households, transport and agriculture. That was nearly 25 percent less than in 2010. Prior to 2010, energy consumption had increased by over 100 times since the beginning of the nineteenth century. In recent years, ever more energy has been generated from renewable sources such as wind, solar and water.

In 1800, gross national energy consumption stood at 31 PJ, and peat (37 percent) and coal (14 percent) provided important sources of fossil energy. In addition, non-fossil sources such as windmills, water mills and wood provided nearly half of all energy produced.

From coal to crude oil

After 1860, the Netherlands gradually switched to using coal as a source of energy. By 1900, nearly 80 percent of all energy consumed was derived from coal – over five times more than in 1860.

After World War II, crude oil became an increasingly important source of energy, partly due to the sharp increase in the number of cars and lorries on the roads. Energy consumption from crude oil continued to rise until 1973, after which there was a temporary fall. The oil crisis and the introduction of other sources of energy such as natural gas were important factors underlying this decline.

Netherlands switches to natural gas

In 1959, a gas field was discovered in the province of Groningen. Energy consumption from natural gas rose to nearly 1,700 PJ by 2010, but natural gas consumption began to decrease after 2010. This was partly due to improved energy-efficiency and the introduction of renewable sources.

Since 1969, the Netherlands has also been generating electricity from nuclear energy. The consumption of nuclear energy reached a peak in 1980, at 46 PJ.

More renewable energy

Currently, an increasing share of our energy comes from renewable sources such as solar, wind and biomass. In 2023, 15 percent of energy consumed in the Netherlands was renewable: a total of 403 PJ. The production and consumption of solar energy, in particular, has grown sharply in recent years.

Despite the sharp rise in renewables, fossil energy is still the most important. Natural gas, crude oil and coal combined accounted for over 80 percent of all energy consumed in 2023.

Sources

StatLine –

StatLine –





Notes

Petajoule

In 2023, one PJ was equivalent to the energy consumption of approximately 25 thousand households.How much land is used for organic farming?

Of all the farmland in the Netherlands in 2023, 4.5 percent was used for organic farming. That is a total of 81.5 hectares. Over the past year, 7.2 thousand hectares of organic farmland was added, the equivalent of over 14 thousand football fields.

The target of the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality is for 15 percent of all farmland to be organic by 2030. In order to reach that target, the total area of organic farmland will need to increase by 26 thousand hectares annually, on average, in the years ahead. That is an area equivalent to over 50 thousand football fields.

Dairy farms make up roughly half of organic farmland

Organic dairy farms accounted for almost half (47.7 percent) of all organic farmland in the Netherlands in 2023. That was 8.3 percent more than in the previous year. Arable farming (including cereals, kale, onions and potatoes) accounted for 16.4 percent of organic farmland.

8.2 thousand hectares of agricultural land undergoing conversion to organic

Farmers wishing to switch to organic methods first need to undergo a conversion period. This ensures that most residues of fertilizers and pesticides have time to disappear from the soil. Following the conversion period, farms are issued with a certificate, and are officially allowed to call themselves ‘organic’.

In 2023, 8.2 thousand hectares of farmland were in conversion, with or without certification. Dairy farmers had 3.9 thousand hectares of land under conversion, while arable farmers had 1.1 thousand hectares. The remaining land in conversion was divided between horticultural farms, other farms for grazing animals and farms growing crops and raising animals.

Fewer organic chickens

The number of organically reared cattle increased by 5.2 percent to over 84 thousand, and the number of organically reared pigs also increased by 3.6 percent to nearly 120 thousand. In percentage terms, 2.2 percent of all cattle were organically reared, while for pigs the share was 1.1 percent.

The number of organically reared chickens, by contrast, was down by 13.9 percent in 2023. The number of organically reared goats and sheep also declined.

More organic farms

The number of certified organic farms increased by 40 in 2023. That took the total number to around 1,900 organic farms. There were also 180 farms in the process of converting to organic in 2023.

In total, there were over 500 organic dairy farms and 300 organic arable farms in 2023.

Source

StatLine –





Notes

Converting to organic farming, with and without certification

Farms converting to organic practices with certification are monitored by the Skal Biocontrole Foundation. This foundation determines when a business can be certified and inspects organic farms. The conversion process for crop plots generally takes two years.

In addition, farmers can convert land without being certified, for example if they decide to make a more gradual switch to organic farming. Arable farms might grow organic potatoes and decide to convert their fields of carrots without certification, for instance. This allows them to convert their land to organic farming in a gradual manner. However, this type of conversion is subject to strict requirements. Skal Biocontrole will assess the non-certified conversion and decide on certification after a period of three years.What type of work do most people do?

A total of 9.7 million people aged 15 to 74 were in paid employment in 2023. Nearly half of them worked in jobs related to business administration, healthcare and well-being or technology. The most common occupation among men was ICT specialist (385 thousand), while among women, it was an administrative job (492 thousand).

More than 8 in 10 people who work in technology, ICT or transportation and logistics are men. In comparison with women, men are more likely to be managers or to work in agriculture. On the other hand, women are more likely to work in services, education or healthcare and well-being.

An increasing number of people work in ICT

In 2023, there were 1.3 million more people aged 15 to 74 in paid employment than in 2013. Nine of the 13 occupational classes had more workers than a decade earlier. The largest change was seen in ICT, which had nearly twice as many workers as in 2013. The number increased from 282 thousand to 542 thousand. Many people also started working in occupations related to business and administration, healthcare and well-being or education.

Mainly young people switched careers

In 2023, some people in employment made a career switch: an average of 5 percent every three months.

A small share of these (1 percent) switched jobs, but the new job belonged to the same occupational class. An occupational class is a group of jobs that share the same level and requirements. An example would be a care worker who continues to work in the same care home, but as a social worker.

The majority of switchers (4 percent) found a job in a different occupational class. For example, if the same care worker started working as a communications officer. Many of those who did this in 2023 were young people with part-time jobs. They are more likely to switch careers.

Source

StatLine –



How many people are irritated by dog waste in their neighbourhood?

Nearly 6 in 10 people think that dog waste is a nuisance in their neighbourhood – on pavements or in green spaces, for example. Litter in the street was also a source of irritation for more than 4 in 10 people in the Netherlands in 2023.

The figures are taken from the Safety Monitor, a survey conducted by CBS and the Ministry of Justice and Security. In 2023, approximately 180 thousand people aged 15 years and over participated in this survey.

Litter and vandalism

Litter and dog waste in the streets are the two types of pollution that people are bothered by the most often, while fewer people are bothered by vandalised street furniture, such as litter bins or benches, or by graffiti on walls and buildings. In fact, 7 in 10 people say that dog waste and litter are a source of irritation, and more than 2 in 10 say that they are a serious problem.

People living in the countryside are the least concerned about dog waste

Dog waste is a major source of irritation for 16 percent of the Dutch population. This is slightly higher in built-up areas than in rural areas. People in the highest wealth group are the least likely to say they are bothered by this type of pollution in their neighbourhood. Young people aged below 25 are the least likely to think that dog mess is a nuisance, while those aged 25 to 44 are the most likely to see it as a problem.

Less concern about litter and vandalism

The percentage of people who think that pollution and vandalism, such as dog waste and litter in their neighbourhood, are a serious problem decreased from 25 to 21 between 2012 and 2022. Another concern is antisocial behaviour, such as teenagers loitering in the streets, neighbours making a lot of noise, or drug use. Approximately the same number of people experienced high levels of irritation from antisocial behaviour in 2023 as in 2012. The level had actually fallen in the intervening years. Traffic nuisance, such as speeding drivers for example, has hardly changed since 2012.



Where do we go on holiday the most often?

Germany is the most popular destination among holidaymakers from the Netherlands. Collectively, we took 3.6 million holidays amongst our eastern neighbours in 2023. Other popular destinations were France (2.9 million holidays) and Spain (2.1 million). Dutch people went on holiday 2.5 times a year, on average.

That was a total of 37.6 million holidays in 2023, of which 16.7 million were holidays in the Netherlands and 20.9 million were holidays abroad. Germany was the most popular holiday destination in both summer and winter. In 2022, France was the most popular destination for holidaymakers. Outside Europe, the USA was the most visited holiday destination.

Germany more popular among people travelling without children

The largest group of people who went on holiday in Germany in 2023 were couples travelling without children. They took a total of 1.0 million holidays there. A further 875 thousand holidays were taken there by people travelling with children. People travelling with children spent less time away, on average. People with children who went to Germany spent one day less there, on average, than couples without children. People who travelled to Germany with friends or others spent the longest on holiday.

More than 8 days away

In 2023, the average holiday lasted 8.4 days. People who went on holiday abroad stayed away nearly twice as long (10.8 days) as those who spent their holidays in the Netherlands (5.5 days). And people went away for longer in the summer than in the winter. In summer, the average holiday was 9.3 days long, and in winter it was 7.2 days long.

Travelling without reservations

A total of 3.6 million Dutch people went on holiday without booking accommodation in advance. They spent 9 days away from home, on average. In 2023, people went on holiday to Germany a total of 256 thousand times without booking in advance. Those who did arrange accommodation in Germany beforehand were most likely to have done this 1 to 3 months in advance.

Majority of people travel by car

In 2023, most people went on holiday by car (63 percent), while 20 percent travelled by air and 9 percent by train. More Dutch people go on holiday by car in the summer than in the winter, relatively speaking. Conversely, the share of holidays made by air and by rail is higher in the winter than in the summer.

Relevant link

News release –





Notes

Holidays

A holiday is defined as time away from the person’s own home when they can relax and enjoy leisure time, with at least one overnight stay. This includes holidays both in the Netherlands and abroad. Holidays exceeding 90 days were not included in this survey.

Trips involving stays with family, friends or others, which the respondent describes as holidays, are also counted as holidays. If the respondent describes this kind of stay as a family visit or business trip, however, it is not counted as a holiday.

In the Holiday Survey, holidays are counted per person and not per household or group of travellers, as members of a household can also go on holiday separately.

Holiday season

The summer and winter seasons are seen as separate periods within a year. The summer season lasts for around 22 weeks between May and September and includes the spring-summer season, high season and late summer season. The winter season lasts for around 30 weeks between October and April and includes the autumn, Christmas and Easter periods. Holidays are assigned to a particular season based on the return date. Until 2020, this was based on the date of departure.What kind of vegetables do we grow in our greenhouses?

Dutch greenhouses mainly grow tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers and aubergines. In 2023, together these vegetables occupied a total of 4.1 thousand hectares – about the same area as Amstelveen. Much of this area (over 43%) was used for tomatoes and almost 38% for peppers, followed by cucumbers and aubergines.

The area used to grow these four greenhouse vegetables was about 373 hectares larger in 2023 than a decade earlier, an increase of 10 percent. Most of the extra space was used to grow peppers and aubergines. After a peak in 2021, recent years have seen a decline in the area used for these four vegetables. But despite this trend reversal, in 2023 it was still larger than a decade earlier.

Fewer farms growing greenhouse vegetables

In 2023, there were 625 farms growing greenhouse vegetables in the Netherlands – 29 percent fewer than a decade earlier. The biggest drop was in the number of tomato growers, with the number of farms growing vine tomatoes decreasing by almost 50 percent. On the other hand, the number of farms growing cherry tomatoes grew by 150 percent.

A majority of the farms growing greenhouse vegetables still grow tomatoes (35 percent), followed by peppers (30 percent) and cucumbers (29 percent).

Greenhouse vegetable production has fallen in recent years

In 2023, the total yield of greenhouse vegetables was 1.63 million tonnes, almost the same as a decade earlier. After rising steadily until 2020, yields then began to fall. In 2023, yields decreased by 2 percent compared to the year before, to about the same level as a decade earlier.

This decline in production is mainly due to high energy prices. Some tomato growers have switched to cucumbers, partly because these require less energy. The cucumber yield was up by 7 percent in 2023, as a result. Aubergine, tomato and pepper yields all fell last year.

Sources

StatLine –

StatLine –





Notes

Greenhouse vegetables

Greenhouse vegetables include aubergines, cucumbers, peppers, tomatoes and propagation materials (such as seeds) grown under glass.

Gross yield

Gross yield is the total harvest yield and includes everything that has already been harvested or is expected to be harvested. The gross yield also includes crops that are not suitable for their original use.

This only applies to crops that can be used for different authorised business purposes (such as potatoes that are only suitable for use in livestock feed).How many people apply for asylum in the Netherlands?

In 2023, over 38 thousand people applied for asylum in the Netherlands for the first time. In addition, 10 thousand family members of people who had already been granted asylum – known as following family members – arrived in the Netherlands. Most asylum requests were made by people from Syria: 13 thousand. Most following family member applicants also came from Syria.

First-time asylum applicants were mostly men, accounting for three-quarters of all first-time requests. Among asylum seekers from Syria and Yemen, this percentage was even higher (84 and 83 percent, respectively). Most asylum seekers were younger than 35 when they made their asylum request, and almost 3 in 10 asylum seekers were younger than 18. Nearly half of asylum seekers from Eritrea were under 18.

Following family member applicants

In 2023, just over 10 thousand following family member applicants moved to the Netherlands. Once they arrive in the Netherlands, these family members also receive a residence permit.

Most following family member applicants came from Syria, Turkey and Yemen. Just over half of them were women (6 out of 10), and a little fewer than half were under 18. Among following family member applicants from Syria and Yemen, 6 out of 10 were under 18.

Source

StatLine –

Relevant link

Dossier –



How many people use cannabis?

In 2023, nearly 8 percent of those aged 12 years and over reported having used cannabis in the previous year. Those in their twenties are the most likely to do so.

Twice as many men (10 percent) as women (5 percent) said they had used cannabis in the past twelve months. Among those in their twenties, 28 percent of men and 15 percent of women had used cannabis. These numbers have not changed in recent years. Cannabis use has been surveyed in a similar way in the Health Survey/Lifestyle Monitor since 2015.

A quarter have used cannabis at some point

In 2023, a quarter of people said they had used cannabis at some point in the past, including more than a year ago. These are mainly people aged between 20 and 50. Those in the 75 and over age group were the least likely to report having used cannabis in the past.

20‑somethings are also the most likely to use other drugs

People in their twenties are also more likely than people in other age groups to say they have used drugs other than cannabis. After cannabis, ecstasy was the second most commonly used drug: 13 percent of those in the 20–29 age group said they had used it in the past year, in 2023. Among those aged 12 years and above, the share was 4 percent.

Sources

RIVM research –

StatLine –



How big is the Dutch economy?

The size of the Dutch economy is measured in terms of its gross domestic product (GDP), which surpassed 1 trillion euros in 2023. GDP is the sum of all the goods and services produced in a country in one year. The Dutch economy is about four times larger than the Portuguese economy, for example, and almost twice the size of the Belgian economy. Meanwhile, the German economy is about four times the size of the Dutch economy.

The Netherlands’ gross domestic product (GDP) in 2023 was 1,068 billion euros, not adjusted for price changes. The Dutch economy surpassed 1 trillion euros for the first time last year. Dutch GDP has grown relatively strongly in recent years, partly due to the economic recovery following the Covid-19 pandemic, but also due to higher inflation.

In 1995, Dutch GDP was 330 billion euros. By 2002, it had reached 500 billion euros. Since 1995, the only years in which the Netherlands’ GDP had contracted were 2009 and 2020. Those were, respectively, the years in which the world financial crisis and the COVID-19 crisis struck.

Netherlands is now the fifth-largest economy in the EU

The Dutch economy is now the fifth-largest in the European Union. Germany is the EU’s largest economy with a GDP of over 4 trillion euros. France and Italy have the next largest economies.

The United States has the largest economy in the world, followed by China. The Netherlands ranks 18th in the world, in terms of its economic output.





Notes

Economy

In this article, the economy is shown based on actual prices, so without adjustment for price changes. This is a measure of the size of the economy and is used, for example, to express government debt as a percentage of GDP. When discussing economic growth, on the other hand, the size of the economy is adjusted for price changes in order to look at changes in the size of GDP: economic growth.How often do workers go on strike?

There were 52 labour strikes in 2023. Strikes used to be much more frequent: in 1901 – the first year for which Statistics Netherlands (CBS) has figures on this – there were 122 strikes, and in 1919 there were as many as 649. In recent decades, the number of strikes has been relatively low. Union membership is also declining.

Compared to today, the 1920s saw an especially high number of strikes. But the record year was 1919, with 649 strikes. That year, many workers went on strike to demand better working conditions, such as an eight-hour working day. The number of strikes was also relatively high in the period shortly after the Second World War, partly because of workers’ protests against the war in the Dutch East Indies.

In the past 40 years, there have not been as many strikes. There was a comparatively small number of strikes in 2019 (26), but due to large-scale strikes in education and healthcare a record number of workers were involved. Teachers and healthcare workers went on strike to demand better pay and reduced workloads.

In 2023, there were 52 labour disruptions – the highest number in more than 50 years. The sector with the most strikes was manufacturing. Compared with other sectors, the trade sector also had a high number of strikes.

More working days lost due to strikes in the past

Strikes used to last longer than they do now. The 1920s saw a particularly high number of working days lost, even though there were far fewer workers then. The peak year was 1924, when as many as 3.2 million working days were lost to strikes.

Union membership has declined

Trade unions usually play an important role in strikes, and union membership among workers is falling. In 2023, 15 percent of workers aged 15 to 75 belonged to a union. This is equivalent to nearly 1.3 million people. From the beginning of the 1950s to the end of the 1970s, union membership was between 35 and 40 percent.

Since 1980, union membership has been in decline, apart from a small resurgence in the early 1990s. In recent years, the share of union members decreased most sharply among older workers, but the membership rate among younger workers is also falling. When asked why they do not belong to a union, the main reason given by most workers is that they have never seriously considered joining.



How many people experience flight shame?

In 2023, 27 percent of people who sometimes travel by aeroplane reported experiencing ‘flight shame’ – a feeling of guilt about travelling by air because of its impact on the climate. That was an increase since 2020, when 19 percent reported experiencing flight shame. There was also a rise in the number of people willing to reduce their air travel for recreational purposes.

In 2020, 46 percent of adults said they had travelled by air at least once in the previous twelve months. By 2023, that number had fallen slightly to 41 percent. Of these, 14 percent had flown for business purposes and 85 percent for a holiday or city trip. Younger people fly more frequently than older people. In both 2020 and 2023, 8 percent of respondents said they had never flown at all.

Over 4 in 10 do not feel any guilt at all about air travel

Between 2020 and 2023 there was an increase in the number of people who sometimes travel by air but feel guilty about this because of the impact on the climate. There were also fewer people who experience no flight shame at all: a drop from 50 percent to 43 percent. The share of people who have no strong opinion about flying remained almost unchanged. Women are more likely to experience flight shame than men, and older people feel more guilty about flying than younger people.

More people willing to reduce air travel for leisure purposes

Among adults who sometimes travel by aeroplane for leisure purposes, 36 percent say they would definitely be willing to do so less often for the sake of the climate. That was a higher proportion than in 2020, when 27 percent said this. In 2023, 29 percent said they would not be willing to reduce the number of flights they take. In both years, around 1 in 10 people said they would be willing to stop travelling by aeroplane for leisure purposes altogether.

Source

News release –



How far is the nearest hospital or outpatient clinic?

In 2023, the distance to the nearest hospital or outpatient clinic by road for people in the Netherlands was 4.8 kilometres on average. That was 400 metres less than in 2008. However, the distance to other types of healthcare facilities increased. The distance to the nearest hospital or outpatient clinic varies greatly by municipality. Residents of the Randstad conurbation in the west of the country have the most hospitals or outpatient clinics nearby.

People living in the western and central areas of the country usually have to travel less far to a hospital or outpatient clinic than those living elsewhere in the Netherlands. In just under half of municipalities, the distance to a hospital or outpatient clinic was no more than 5 kilometres in 2023. Statistics Netherlands (CBS) only looked at the distance to hospitals in the Netherlands. People living close to the border may also have the option of visiting a hospital in Belgium or Germany.

The distance was shortest in Wageningen and Doesburg at 1.3 kilometres, while residents of the island of Schiermonnikoog had the furthest to travel, at 57.5 kilometres. Approximately 76 thousand Dutch people lived in a municipality where they had to travel 20 kilometres or more to get to the nearest hospital or outpatient clinic. In addition to Schiermonnikoog, this applies to residents of the islands of Ameland, Terschelling and Vlieland, as well as to Dantumadiel and Northeast Friesland on the mainland.

Average distance to hospital now slightly shorter

In 2023, the average distance to a hospital or outpatient clinic was shorter than 15 years earlier: 4.8 kilometres, compared with 5.2 kilometres in 2008. This is partly because there are more outpatient clinics today. However, Dutch people travel slightly further on average for other types of healthcare, such as a GP out-of-hours service or pharmacy.

Most hospitals in the Randstad are within 20 kilometres

In 2023, the average address in the Netherlands had 8.8 hospitals or outpatient clinics within a 20‑kilometre drive, but there are more hospitals and outpatient clinics in the Randstad. For instance, residents of Delft, Lansingerland, Pijnacker-Nootdorp and Schiedam could reach 25 or more hospitals or outpatient clinics within a distance of 20 kilometres. On the other hand, 1 percent of Dutch residents lived in a municipality with a maximum of 1 hospital or outpatient clinic within a distance of 20 kilometres. These were mainly located in the north of the Netherlands.

Source

StatLine –





Notes

Hospital or outpatient clinic

This publication looked at the distance to the nearest hospitals or outpatient clinics. Outpatient clinics are clinics that are not located at one of the hospital sites, allowing patients easier access to common diagnostic tests and procedures.How many guests stayed at Dutch campsites?

In 2023, 5.2 million guests stayed overnight on campsites in the Netherlands. That was approximately 4 percent more than in 2022 and in 2019 (the last year before the coronavirus pandemic). The number of foreign campers saw a particularly sharp increase last year.

In 2023, the number of foreign guests staying overnight at Dutch campsites rose by 17 percent to 1.7 million compared to the previous year. The number of campers from the Netherlands was 3.5 million, down by 2 percent compared with 2022.

A lot of guests from neighbouring countries

Approximately a third (1.7 million) of the guests staying at Dutch campsites came from abroad. The largest numbers of foreign guests were from Germany (1.3 million), Belgium (200 thousand) and the United Kingdom (42 thousand). The number of campers from the UK increased by 35 percent, while the number from Germany increased by 16 percent (175 thousand).

More foreign guests at campsites in Limburg

Campsites in Gelderland received the most guests in 2023 (834 thousand), 13 percent more than in 2022. These were mainly guests from the Netherlands.

Zeeland received the most foreign campers (457 thousand). Noord-Holland received 31 percent more foreign campers and the numbers also increased in Gelderland (up by 31 percent) and Limburg (up by 40 percent).

Of all provinces, Limburg saw the largest overall increase in the number of guests (up by 26 percent), while the northern provinces and Utrecht saw a decline.

Guests from the Netherlands stay slightly longer than foreign guests

The total number of overnight stays made by all guests exceeded 28 million in 2023. That was 7 percent more than in 2022. Nearly 75 percent of those overnight stays were made by guests from the Netherlands who stayed one or more nights.

Approximately 8 million nights were made by foreign guests. That was 21 percent more than in the previous year. Dutch people stayed 6 nights, on average, while foreign guests stayed 5 nights.

Sources

StatLine –

StatLine –



How many people have good oral health?

In 2023, 7 in 10 Dutch people aged 18 and over said they had good oral health. They rated the health of their teeth and gums as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. Twenty percent of adults reported having full or partial dentures, with 7 percent of over-18s saying they no longer had any teeth of their own at all (almost everyone in this group had dentures).

Of women aged 18 and over, 73 percent rated their oral health as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. Among men, this was 69 percent. When asked about to describe the overall health of their teeth and gums, women were more likely than men to answer ‘very good’, while men were more likely to answer ‘bad’.

People aged 18 to 39 most likely to report good oral health

The percentage of adults who rated their oral health as good or very good was highest in the 18–39 age group. For men, this share was lowest in the 65–74 age group and highest among those aged 18–39. Among women, those in the 18–24 age group in particular reported good or very good oral health, while this group was much smaller among women aged 55 and over (less than 70 percent).

Women in the 18–24 age group were also more likely to rate their oral health as good or very good than men of the same age: 83 percent versus 72 percent.

6 in 10 over-75s have dentures

Among those aged 75 years and over, 61 percent reported having full or partial upper or lower dentures. In the slightly younger 65–74 age group, 41 percent said they had dentures. Thirty-one percent of over-75s said they no longer had any of their own upper or lower teeth, compared to 16 percent in the 65–74 age group.

8 in 10 people in highest income bracket happy with oral health

Among adults in the 20 percent of households with the highest incomes , 78 percent rated their own oral health as good. In the lowest income bracket, 63 percent did so, but women in this group were more likely than men to rate their oral health as good. In the other income groups, there were no differences between men and women.





Notes

Income

Households are divided into five groups according to their standardised income (income quintiles), with the same number of households in each group. The standardised income is disposable income adjusted for differences in household size and composition.What is the level of education in the Netherlands?

In 2023, among those aged 15 to 74 years, 37 percent had a diploma of secondary vocational education (MBO-2, 3 or 4), senior general secondary education (HAVO) or pre-university education (VWO) as their highest educational qualification. Nearly as many (36 percent) had completed higher vocational or university education, while 26 percent had completed prevocational secondary education (VMBO), MBO-1 or primary education only.

Over the last decade, more Dutch people have been attending higher vocational education (HBO) or university. In 2013, 28 percent of people aged 15 to 74 had a HBO or university degree, but by 2023 that share was 36 percent. Conversely, the percentage with a secondary education diploma from HAVO, VWO or MBO as their highest educational qualification dropped over the same period. As a result, both these groups were approximately the same size by 2023.

More women have completed higher education than men

In 2023, more women than men had a degree from HBO or university. Among women, the largest group (37 percent) have a higher education degree, while among men the largest group (38 percent) have a secondary education diploma from MBO, HAVO or VWO as their highest educational qualification.

In 2013 this situation was the other way around: more men than women had a degree from higher education (HBO or university). At that time, women were more likely to have at most a diploma from MBO, HAVO or VWO as their highest educational qualification. In 2013, women were also more likely to have primary school as their highest educational qualification, or a VMBO or MBO-1 diploma, than in 2023.

More young people in HBO and university than ever before

In the past, it was quite common for young people to leave education after finishing primary school. Among 65 to 74‑year-olds, 41 percent had only completed primary school or a programme comparable to VMBO or MBO-1. Nowadays, however, it is more important to stay in education for longer, and more Dutch people have a degree from HBO or university. Of those aged 25 to 34, 54 percent have completed HBO or university education. Among young people aged 15 to 24 this share is lower, at 14 percent, because this age group is more likely to still be in the process of finishing their studies.



What volume of greenhouse gases do we emit?

The Netherlands emitted 149.5 billion kilograms of greenhouse gases (CO 2 equivalent) in 2023. This includes the total volume of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), methane, nitrous oxide and fluorinated gases emitted. Emissions in 2023 were 6 percent lower than in 2022.

Greenhouse gases in our atmosphere are causing global temperatures to rise. This means that greenhouse gas emissions must be reduced. The Climate Act states that by 2030, greenhouse gas emissions must be reduced to 55 percent lower than 1990 levels, or less. In 2023, greenhouse gas emissions were 34 percent lower than 1990 levels.

‘Urgenda’ target has now been met comfortably

In addition to the target set in the Climate Act, there is also the ‘Urgenda’ target. This states that emissions must be at least 25 percent lower than 1990 levels by 2020 and in subsequent years. This target was met in 2020 (26.0 percent lower than 1990 levels), narrowly missed in 2021 (24.8 percent lower), but was achieved more comfortably in 2022 and 2023 (30.5 percent lower and 34.0 percent lower, respectively). In 2022, this was mainly because the Netherlands consumed much less natural gas due to higher gas prices. In 2023, meanwhile, more electricity was generated from solar and wind power, and less from coal and natural gas.

Industry responsible for most greenhouse gas emissions

The industrial sector is responsible for the majority of our greenhouse gas emissions, mainly in the form of CO 2 . This sector emitted 3 percent less in 2023 than in 2022. Coal consumption fell by 21 percent, and natural gas consumption by 4 percent; however, more petroleum-based raw materials and products were used. Mobility (traffic and transport) and agriculture were the second and third-largest emitters in 2023. Greenhouse gas emissions as a result of generating electricity are falling steadily.

Emissions from agriculture and mobility up slightly in 2023

In 2023, greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture were 2 percent higher than in 2022. Emissions were relatively low in 2022 because less natural gas was used in greenhouse horticulture due to the elevated price of gas. Emissions of methane and nitrous oxide from livestock and manure remained almost unchanged in 2023, compared to previous years.

The mobility sector (transport) also emitted 2 percent more greenhouse gases in 2023 than in the previous year. This was mainly because more petrol was consumed.

Sources

StatLine –

StatLine –

News release –

Relevant links

Greenhouse gas emissions dossier –

Greenhouse gas emissions dossier –





Notes

The Climate Act

The amended Climate Act of 21 July 2023 sets the target for greenhouse gas emissions in the Netherlands. According to that target, by 2030 emissions must be 55 percent lower than their 1990 levels, or less.

Urgenda target

The Urgenda Foundation is a campaign action group that aims to make the Netherlands sustainable more rapidly. On 24 June 2015, the foundation and 900 other plaintiffs won a legal case against the government of the Netherlands regarding the Netherlands’ climate policy. The court ruled that greenhouse gas emissions must be at least 25 percent lower than 1990 levels by 2020 and and in subsequent years.How are our snakes and lizards doing?

Between 1994 and 2023, the population of seven species of reptiles (snakes and lizards) native to the Netherlands increased by an average of 30 percent. However, numbers have actually fallen over the past 12 years. The sand lizard population has declined the most in recent years, while the common wall lizard has increased significantly.

The Netherlands is home to seven species of reptiles. That includes three species of snakes (adder, grass snake and smooth snake), and four species of lizards (slow worm, viviparous lizard or common lizard, sand lizard and wall lizard). Their populations are calculated over the entire period (1994–2023), as well as over the past twelve years (2012–2023). This is important in order to keep a close eye on these reptilian species. If necessary, swift measures can then be taken to protect lizards or snakes.

More wall lizards, but fewer sand lizards

The populations of three species of reptiles have increased since 1994. There are more wall lizards, in particular: nine times as many as in 1994. There are also more slow worms: three times as many as in 1994. However, after years of increasing in number, the population of sand lizards has actually decreased sharply over the past 12 years. Populations of the viviparous lizard and the adder have also declined over the past 12 years. Numbers of grass snakes and smooth snakes have fluctuated since 1994, but the trend has mainly been downward over the last 12 years.



How many fast food restaurants are there in the Netherlands?

At the beginning of 2024, there were 19 thousand fast food outlets in the Netherlands. That is over 50 percent more than a decade ago: in 2014, there were over 12.5 thousand.

In total, there are 37.8 thousand eating places in our country. Just over half of these are fast food outlets, including sandwich shops, food stalls, ice cream parlours and traditional Dutch snack bars. As numbers have grown over the past decade, fast food outlets have come to outnumber traditional restaurants. In 2014, the opposite was true. The number of places to eat has increased steadily since 2014, with the exception of one year: there were slightly fewer places to eat in early 2023 than in early 2022.

20 percent in the four major cities

Most fast food restaurants can be found in densely populated areas. For example, the Netherlands’ four biggest cities combined are home to nearly 20 percent of all fast food outlets. There are 1,560 in Amsterdam, 920 in Rotterdam, 785 in The Hague, and 450 in Utrecht. In order to compare the concentration of fast food outlets, food stalls and ice cream parlours across all municipalities, Statistics Netherlands (CBS) looks at the number of outlets per thousand inhabitants.

Fast food is popular along the coast

On average, there is slightly more than one fast food restaurant per thousand residents in the Netherlands. There are more in municipalities that receive a lot of tourists, with a lot of fast food on offer along the North Sea coast, for example. The Wadden Islands have the most fast food outlets per thousand inhabitants, due to tourism. Fast food outlets are also more common in Zandvoort and the coastal towns of Zeeland. The same applies to Baarle-Nassau and Valkenburg aan de Geul in South Limburg.

In the eastern and north-eastern areas of the Netherlands, the number of fast food outlets per resident is slightly lower than average. Staphorst has the lowest number relative to its population: one fast food outlet per 3 thousand residents. That is about three times lower than the national average.



What are the major religions?

In the last 175 years, the proportion of the population with no religion has risen from virtually zero to 58 percent. In 1849, the Netherlands was almost entirely Christian: 56 percent Protestant and 38 percent Roman Catholic. By 2023, 13 percent were Protestant and 17 percent Catholic.

In the mid-nineteenth century, a small group of people had a different faith (6 percent). These included Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists and Jews. In 1889, the census recorded 49 ‘Mohammedans’, as Muslims were called at that time. Most were immigrants from the Dutch East Indies. The share who said they had no religion was 2 percent.

Almost 8 in 10 people were Protestant or Roman Catholic in the 1960s

By just after the Second World War, the non-religious group had grown to 17 percent. At that time, the Netherlands still had slightly more Protestants than Roman Catholics (40 percent versus 38 percent of the population). By the next census, in 1960, this situation had reversed, and the group of non-believers had also grown slightly, to 18 percent.

Muslims made up 6 percent of the population in 2023

By the mid-twentieth century, there were several hundred Muslims in the Netherlands, according to population records. Their numbers increased in the 1950s due to immigration from Indonesia, and after 1960 due to the arrival of ‘guest workers’ and their families from Turkey and Morocco. In 2023, 6 percent of the population identified as Muslim. People of Turkish or Moroccan origin make up the largest Muslim population groups, but there are also Muslims with roots in Suriname, Afghanistan, Iraq and other countries.

From estimates to surveys

Until 2005, CBS estimated the number of Muslims in the Netherlands by determining the number of Muslims in each group of inhabitants with a migration background. This was done based on the percentage of Muslims in each group’s country of origin. These numbers were then added up to calculate the total number of Muslims in the Netherlands. Later, it became clear that the distribution of religious affiliation among the people who had come to the Netherlands was different from the overall distribution in their countries of origin, and so the figures were refined in 2005. They now come from surveys in which people are asked about their religious affiliation directly. Since 2010, affiliation with Islam is also shown separately in a new StatLine table. Before that date, Islam fell under ‘Religious affiliation: other’, along with Hinduism, Buddhism and Judaism.

Source

StatLine – (only available in Dutch)



How many pesticides are sold?

A total of 9 million kilograms of pesticides were sold in 2022 in order to control pests and diseases, mainly for use on agricultural crops. Pesticide sales were down by 4 percent compared to 2021, and down by 18 percent since 2011. Sales of products that control fungi and bacteria saw the biggest drop compared with 2011 (30 percent).

Sales of products that control insects and mites fell by 15 percent compared with 2021, while sales of products that control fungi and bacteria dropped by 10 percent. Sales of herbicides and products that control foliage growth rose by 5 percent. The latter reduce the vulnerability of crops like potatoes to disease and make them easier to harvest. Sales of ‘Other pesticides’ increased by 23 percent compared to 2021.

One-third of pesticides sold to combat fungi and bacteria

Although most (3 million kg) of the pesticides sold were to combat fungi and bacteria, sales of these products have declined sharply since 2020. Sales of weed control products and potato foliage control products were slightly lower (2.7 million kg). Insect and mite control products accounted for a quarter of total sales (2.3 million kg).

Fewer snail pesticides

The category of ‘Other pesticides’ includes products to control snails, as well as products that affect plant growth (such as stunted growth in cereals) and reproduction (anti-sprouting agents for potatoes). Compared to 2021, a year which saw a lot of heavy rainfall, sales of snail pesticides were down by 39 percent in 2022, while sales of plant growth regulators and sprout inhibitors increased by 28 percent.

Sales of products that affect plant growth or reproduction have increased the most since 2011, the first year for which CBS has figures.

Mancozeb-based anti-fungal agents no longer sold

The four main categories of pesticides can be subdivided according to their active ingredients.

Fungicides containing the active ingredient mancozeb were taken off the market in 2022 and sales therefore dropped to zero. One year earlier, 1.1 million kg were sold, and 1.9 million kg in 2011.

Sales of the herbicide glyphosate amounted to 0.76 million kg in 2022, up from 0.70 million kg in 2021. These figures are similar to 2020. In 2011, a similar amount of 0.71 million kg of this agent was sold.

Sales of paraffin oils (used to control plant viruses spread by aphids) fell for the second year in a row in 2022, to 1.78 million kg. This means that they have almost returned to 2011 levels.

Source

StatLine –



How many students passed their final exams and what did they do next?

Many of the students who fail their final school exams try again the following year. Students who pass their exams often go on to higher education. However, students in VWO (pre-university education) in particular often opt for a gap year.

In the 2022–23 school year, nearly 90 thousand students were in their final year of prevocational secondary education (VMBO), and 89 percent of them passed their final exams. 79 percent of the nearly 53 thousand students in senior general secondary education (HAVO) passed their final exams, and 84 percent of the 39 thousand students in pre-university education (VWO) did so.

What do students who failed their final exams do next?

More than two-thirds of students who failed their VMBO-B exams in the 2022–23 school year went on to secondary vocational education (MBO). Students interested in pursuing MBO entry level programmes do not need a secondary education diploma. The same is true for some programmes at MBO-2 level. Students who had failed their VMBO-K exams were just as likely to enter an MBO (47 percent) programme as to stay in VMBO education (45 percent), while those who had failed their VMBO-G and VMBO-T exams were more likely to stay in VMBO education.

A total of 35 percent of students who failed their final exams in HAVO, and 27 percent of those who failed their final exams in VWO, chose to retake their final year. They were also likely to go on to enter secondary general education for adults (VAVO).

*provisional figures

Majority of school leavers go on to further education

The majority of students who passed their VMBO exams , opted for further education at MBO level. Approximately 18 percent of students who passed their VMBO-T exams entered the fourth grade of HAVO, while 2 percent of them did not enrol in any further education.

Nearly 70 percent of those who passed their HAVO exams entered higher vocational education (HBO), while 6 percent moved on to VWO. Approximately one-fifth of post-HAVO students were no longer enrolled in education. Those students may have opted for a gap year.

Students leaving VWO were the most likely not to enrol in education (24 percent). Approximately one-third of them went straight to university and 10 percent enrolled at a university of applied sciences (HBO programme).

*provisional figures

Source

StatLine – (Only available in Dutch)





Notes

Students graduating from secondary education

Of students who were enrolled in the final year of secondary education (VMBO-4, HAVO-5 or VWO-6) on 1 October 2022, research was carried out to see whether they obtained their diploma in the same school year. It may be the case that students achieved a diploma from a different level of education from that which they were enrolled in on 1 October. No diploma details are available from the registrars for the English Stream (HAVO) and International Baccalaureate (VWO) students. As a result, these students are not included in these figures.

Further education

Further education includes publicly funded programmes in the Netherlands. If students are not enrolled in further education, it is possible that they are no longer in education, but they could also be studying abroad or at a non-publicly funded institution.How many people aged between 67 and 89 are still working?

In 2023, 8 percent of people aged 67 and over were in paid employment. Although the state pension age was 67 that year, 12 percent of men and 4 percent of women of that age and above were still working. That were 172 thousand men and 57 thousand women.

In relative terms, many people aged 67 and over were self-employed persons without staff (45 percent). Nearly 10 percent of older people in employment had a fixed-term contract. This was much less than among people in employment aged between 55 and 66, at nearly 70 percent.

Mainly part-time

A relatively large number of people aged 67 and over were in flexible employment (36 percent). This means they had a temporary contract, for example, or worked on-call or as temporary workers. People aged 65 and over worked mostly part-time, up to 35 hours per week. Slightly more than half worked less than 20 hours per week, while men worked more hours per week than women.

Most people worked in business and administration

In 2023, both men and women aged 67 were likely to work in occupations related to business and administration. Men were also likely to work in engineering and technology or transport. Women were more likely than men to have jobs in health and welfare, services or to do child-related work.

Source

StatLine –





Note

These are people aged between 67 and 89.Could people move house within the next two years if they wanted to?

In recent years, people who want to move house are less likely to be able to do so than in the past. Among those who indicated in 2021 that they wanted to move house within two years, only 44 percent had actually done so by 2023. In 2018–2020, the share was 47 percent.

People who want to move house were those who indicated (in the Netherlands Housing Survey, WoON) that they definitely wanted to move or that they were actively searching but could not find anything suitable.

Main reason for wanting to move: a more suitable home

People can have different reasons for wanting to move house. Most often, the dwelling itself is given as the main reason (31 percent in 2021), followed by wanting to live independently (18 percent) and preferring a different neighbourhood (13 percent). People who want to live independently are mainly younger people who want to live on their own. Work (4 percent) and study (2 percent) are cited by much smaller numbers of people as their main reason for wanting to move house.

In cases where people say they want to move for study or work, most of them do go on to move house. Of those who wanted to move for their studies in 2021, 64 percent actually did so within the subsequent two years. Among those who cited work as their main reason for moving house, the share who actually did so was 53 percent.

People who want to move for work or study are the most likely to move

People who cited work or study as their reason for moving house were just as likely or even more likely to do so in the 2021–23 period than in 2015–17. But this did not apply to those who wanted to move house for other reasons. For example, in 2021–23, 41 percent of people who wanted to move primarily due to the dwelling itself were actually able to move house. In 2015–17, that share was 49 percent. Those who wanted to live independently or to move in with a partner were also less likely to move house in 2021–23 than before. The same applies to people who wanted to move because of their neighbourhood, for financial reasons or health reasons or to be closer to family or friends.

The housing market is the tightest in the Randstad conurbation in the western part of the Netherlands. People living in the Randstad who want to move house were less likely to be able to do so than those living outside the Randstad. How much money people have available is also important; people on higher incomes or with more capital at their disposal are more likely to be able to move house.

Relevant links

News release –

Methods –



What are our biggest export products?

The Netherlands exported goods worth a total of 686 billion euros in 2023, excluding the transit trade. At 157 billion euros, exports of machinery and equipment were worth the most, accounting for 23 percent of the total value of Dutch exports.

Manufactured goods represented 20 percent of total export value, while mineral fuels – such as oil and natural gas – accounted for 18 percent in 2023. Chemical products had an export value of 112 billion euros or more. Meanwhile, food and beverages, raw materials and natural products, and transport equipment together accounted for 162 billion euros. These goods include agricultural products, flowers and ornamental plants, and cars and lorries.

Important trading nation

Many of the products we export are made elsewhere. Almost half of the products exported by Dutch companies are purchased from abroad and sold again without much processing in the Netherlands. These products are called re-exports. More than half of the manufactured goods and machinery and equipment that we export are re-exports.

Most of our food and beverage exports are produced in the Netherlands: 63 percent of these products were produced in the Netherlands in 2023 (accounting for 57 billion euros in export value). Exports fell overall in 2023 – the first drop since 2020, the first year of the coronavirus pandemic. The total value of exported goods was 44 billion euros lower than the previous year.

Most goods bound for Germany

Germany is the main destination for Dutch exports. In 2023, the Netherlands exported goods to Germany worth 155.7 billion euros, representing 23 percent of Dutch exports by value. Belgium accounted for 12 percent (79.6 billion euros). The other destinations in the top 5 are France (8 percent), the United Kingdom (6 percent) and the United States (5 percent).

There is one difference between the top 10 export destinations for 2022 and 2023: China knocked Sweden off ninth place. Although the value of exports to Sweden in 2023 was almost the same as in 2022, exports to China grew by 3.4 billion euros.

Source

StatLine –



How many people are economically independent?

In 2022, nearly 7 in 10 Dutch women and more than 8 in 10 men were economically independent. Among men this share has been fairly stable since the late 1970s, but among women it has risen sharply in recent decades: in 1977, only 2 in 10 women were economically independent. People are defined as economically independent if they earn an income which is at the subsistence level or above. In 2022, that was 1,100 euros per month.

Among women, economic independence rose sharply in the 1980s and 1990s, when more and more women began to engage in paid work. A relatively high number of women also became economically independent after the 2009–2013 economic crisis. This was partly because women started working more hours per week.

Drop in economic independence in women aged 30 and over has largely disappeared in younger generations

In each successive generation of women, more in each age group are economically independent. The gap between generations is the largest among women aged over 60. A difference can also be seen at around the age of 30: in older generations there was a drop in economic independence starting at around that point, but in younger generations this has largely disappeared.

Among women born between 1945 and 1959, the share of those who were economically independent falls until the age of 30. In the next generation (born 1960–1974), it rises until the age of 25 and then falls until the age of 35. Many women become mothers between the ages of 25 and 34, and for those generations that often meant stopping work or working fewer hours. This has happened less in more recent generations: women are more likely to continue working, and to work 20 to 34 hours a week.

Hardly any change in economic independence in men between the ages of 25 and 49

In each generation of men, the number of those who are economically independent increases up to the age of 25, and then changes little, before declining after the age of 50. There is no decline in economic independence among men at around the age at which they generally become fathers. They are more likely to continue working full-time (35 hours a week or more) after the birth of their first child. The decline that starts at the age of 50 is because more and more men become reliant on social benefits as they are no longer able to work or lose their job. Older generations were also more likely to have the chance to retire earlier.

Source

News release –





Notes

The figures over 2022 are provisional.

Economic independence

Economic independence is a concept which, for policy purposes, is related to the minimum subsistence level. A person is considered to be economically independent if their individual net annual income from labour and business activities is at least the same as the individual minimum income. This threshold value is defined as the equivalent of 70 percent of legal minimum wage or, in other words, the net income support entitlement for a one-person household in a given reporting year. That was 1,100 euros per month in 2022.How much money is made in the illegal economy?

A total of 16.4 billion euros was earned from illegal activities on Dutch territory in 2021, particularly through the cocaine trade. Most of the profits made from criminal activities ends up abroad. Illegal activity added 4.5 billion euros to the Dutch economy in 2021. That was 0.5 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). GDP is a measure of the size of an economy.

A total of 420 thousand kilograms of cocaine entered the Netherlands through the ports of Rotterdam and Antwerp in 2021. Of that, 8.5 thousand kilograms was consumed in the Netherlands and the rest was exported to other countries.

Earnings from the illegal economy on Dutch territory dominated by cocaine trade

A total of 10.7 billion euros was made through the cocaine trade within Dutch territory in 2021. However, nearly 90 percent of the money made from the cocaine trade found its way abroad to the drugs bosses who oversee these activities. Many activities around the international trade in drugs in the Netherlands are organised by principals who are not resident in the Netherlands. This means that only the money earned from ‘services’ within the Netherlands, such as trafficking or transporting drugs, remain within the Dutch economy. The cocaine trade contributed 1.2 billion euros to the Dutch economy in 2021.

In 2021, over 3 billion euros was earned from the trade and production of synthetic drugs, such as ecstasy on Dutch territory. Just as with the cocaine trade, most of that money ended up overseas. One billion euros of this was part of the Dutch economy.

Profits from cannabis remain largely within the Dutch economy

When it comes to money made from the trade in cannabis, the majority remains within the Dutch economy. Similarly, earnings from prostitution and contraband tobacco also remain entirely within the Dutch economy.

In 2021, the cannabis trade, unlicensed prostitution and illegal tobacco combined added 2.3 billion euros to the Dutch economy. In the case of cannabis and prostitution, CBS looks not only at the activities that are part of the illegal economy, but also those that are legal or ‘tolerated’ (semi-legal).

Source

Article –

Relevant links

News release –

Article –



How does Statistics Netherlands handle your privacy?

Your personal data are safe with CBS. Individual persons are never identifiable or traceable in the statistics or publications. We also have measures in place to prevent the theft, loss or misuse of personal data. CBS will never supply identifiable data at personal level to third parties, including other government institutions.

CBS protects your data with technical measures. In addition, data are protected under the organisation’s internal regulations. The most important measures include:

When you fill in a survey or submit data, the information is delivered to CBS in encrypted form. At CBS, the data is then stored in a secure environment. Only authorised employees are granted access to this data. They use the data to perform their work.

Personal data are removed from the files as quickly as possible. This means researchers do not see any data such as names, addresses or citizen service numbers (BSN) in the files.

Every CBS employee is required to observe the confidentiality obligation. Each employee signs a confidentiality agreement to this effect.

CBS only uses the data for the purpose of statistical production and scientific research. Use of the data for any other purpose is excluded by law. CBS data are therefore never used for audits, tax inspections, legal matters or marketing and advertising.

An independent body checks whether Statistics Netherlands complies with all privacy-related regulations and agreements.

Source

CBS –




