Date:
2021-07-12
Article Title:
 2020-21 Agricultural Census

Article Content:
Thank you to those farmers who have already completed their 2021 21 Agricultural Census.
If you’ve received the survey and not yet completed it, please do so.
The survey was first sent to selected farms in July, and asks about agricultural production, land and water use in 2020 21.
Each farm is different and every response is important to help paint a clearer picture of agriculture in Australia.
This picture provides insights on the role of agriculture, and its contribution to life in Australia.
Statistics from the Agricultural Census help farmers, providing a rich set of information for regional Australia which can be used to inform decisions to support agriculture and communities.
For example, when natural disasters occur, information from the Agricultural Census can show the number of agricultural businesses in the region, what they produce and value of that production. This can be used to understand the impact on the region and what support is going to be needed for recovery.
The Agricultural Census may also inform industry and government decisions about where and when to invest in roads and other infrastructure. Information from the Agricultural Census can show what commodities are produced in a region, and where investment may improve efficiency and profitability across the supply chain.
We value your time. After listening to feedback from farmers, we’ve made changes to the Agricultural Census so that its simpler to complete and farmers can choose to respond online or with a paper form.
Farmers who have already completed their Agricultural Census have found it quick and easy.
Information from the 2020 21 Agricultural Census will be on the ABS website from mid 2022. For further details on the planned release, go to 
Other ABS agriculture statistics are available on the 
The ABS also thanks all those people who already completed the separate Census of Population and Housing.
While the Census of Population and Housing counts each person and household in Australia on Census night, the Agricultural Census measures agricultural production. Further information can be found on the .
Farmers' participation in both the Agricultural Census and the Census of Population and Housing is critical. Having both censuses this year will provide an important snapshot of who we are, and how Australian agriculture and our communities are changing.
