Date:
2021-12-16
Article Title:
 Aussies count – working out the official population figures

Article Content:
Like Count von Count, we here at the Australian Bureau of Statistics love counting. One of our most important statistics is knowing how many people live in Australia.
The official measure of Australia’s population is called Estimated Resident Population, or ERP. It can tell us how many people live in each local area, state or territory by age and sex.
ERP helps inform important decisions for the country like how much money each state and territory gets from GST revenue and the number of seats in Parliament. Recently, ERP has also been used to calculate COVID 19 vaccination rates.
ERP is made using a mix of data from the  and  as well as births, deaths and migration records.
Source: 
 
The five yearly Census – which counts Australia’s households – is the basis for ERP. Feeding Census data into ERP makes it a richer source of information showing how many and where people live in Australia. By completing your Census in 2021, you just helped us work out the official Aussie population – not just for 2021, but all the way to 2026!
After the Census, we run a Post Enumeration Survey. This survey tells us how many people were missed, counted more than once, or counted by mistake. By comparing this to how many people were counted in the Census we get the total number of people who were in Australia on Census night.  
We then look at any birth, death and migration movements that happened between 30 June of the Census year and Census night to work out the population as at 30 June. We update ERP with births, deaths and migration numbers every year until the next Census when the process starts all over again!
Count von Count would be thrilled to know he’s around the same age as ERP, which has just turned 50!  and  to find out key population differences in the last 50 years. 
Footnote:
*people in Australia – Australia's estimated resident population (ERP) includes all people who usually live in Australia (regardless of nationality, citizenship or visa status), with the exception of people present for foreign military, consular or diplomatic reasons. For the purposes of overseas migration, a person is added to Australia’s population if they have been (or expect to be) in Australia for 12 months or more. Likewise, an Australian resident is removed from the population if they leave Australia for 12 months or more. The 12 months does not have to be continuous and is measured over a 16 month period.
Source: 
