Date:
2021-08-31
Article Title:
 Classifying COVID-19 policy interventions during June quarter 2021 in macroeconomic statistics

Article Content:
The impact of the COVID 19 pandemic continues to drive the largest fiscal response to an event in modern Australian history. The focus of recent policy interventions has shifted to targeted economic support for states affected by additional COVID 19 induced lockdowns.
The ABS continues to undertake extensive consultation with stakeholders and subject matter experts to determine appropriate classifications for COVID 19 policy interventions. These classifications are based on well established conceptual frameworks (footnote 1), which ensure consistent recording of these policies across macroeconomic statistics, particularly in relation to Government Finance Statistics (GFS) and the National Accounts (NA).
The COVID 19 policies are grouped into five broad categories (footnote 2):
  Increased healthcare and frontline services spending
  Provision of assistance to households
  Provision of assistance to corporations, unincorporated enterprises and non profit institutions
  Relaxation of tax and non tax revenue obligations
  Capital injections, establishment of new, or extended, lending facilities and provision of guarantees
Government fiscal support through the quarter continued to target healthcare spending and provision of assistance to households, businesses and non profit institutions.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, spending on social benefits to households in goods and services has increased significantly compared to historical levels. These levels remained elevated during the June quarter. This was driven by ongoing expansions to Commonwealth social programs and COVID related supplementary funding for policy areas like disability and aged care support, as well as state based rebates to households for electricity bills.
Spending on subsidies declined in the June quarter, following the transition from whole of economy business support to more targeted subsidies for industries and regions that continue to be impacted by lockdowns.
The accelerated roll out of COVID 19 vaccines contributed to growth in government final consumption expenditure this quarter. Other health care spending remained elevated due to ongoing COVID 19 health response expenditure on frontline staff and personal protective equipment (PPE).
IMF (2020), "COVID 19: How to Record Government Policy Interventions in Fiscal Statistics", Special Series on Statistical Issues in Response to COVID 19, IMF publication, viewed at 
