Date:
2022-08-24
Article Title:
 Domestic Violence: Experiences of Partner Emotional Abuse

Article Content:
  One in four women and one in six men have experienced partner emotional abuse since the age of 15
  Within emotionally abusive relationships, threatening and degrading behaviours were more commonly experienced than controlling social or financial behaviours
  Financial stress, living with intellectual or psychological disability and single parenthood were associated with higher rates of partner emotional abuse
  Those who experienced abuse or witnessed parental violence as a child were twice as likely than those who did not to experience partner emotional abuse as an adult
  Over half of women and a quarter of men who experienced partner emotional abuse also experienced physical and/or sexual violence by a partner
This article presents new analysis of partner emotional abuse data collected in the 2016 Personal Safety Survey (PSS). Findings are presented for both women and men aged 18 years and over and focus on:
In the PSS, emotional abuse occurs when a person is subjected to certain behaviours or actions that are aimed at preventing or controlling their behaviour, causing them emotional harm or fear. These behaviours are characterised in nature by their intent to manipulate, control, isolate or intimidate the person they are aimed at. They are generally repeated behaviours and include psychological, social, financial (also known as economic abuse), and verbal abuse.
Examples of behaviours used to define emotional abuse in the 2016 PSS include:
For a list of all emotional abuse behaviours collected in the survey, and an exploration of how partner emotional abuse is experienced within relationships, see chapter .
The term partner is used to describe a person the respondent currently lives with (current partner) or has lived with at some point (previous partner) in a married or de facto relationship. The definitions of current and previous partner for the PSS are based on living arrangements at the time of survey.
The statistics presented in this paper highlight strong associations between partner emotional abuse and certain socio demographic characteristics and other forms of violence. While the data shows a statistical correlation between these variables, it cannot be determined whether the experiences are causally linked.
Figures marked with an asterisk (*) have a relative standard error of between 25% and 50% and should be used with caution. All comparisons discussed have been tested for statistical significance, unless otherwise stated. For more information about relative standard error and significance refer to the .
For more information about the survey methodology, refer to .
  The number of people who have experienced partner emotional abuse
  The socio demographic and economic characteristics of persons who have recently experienced partner emotional abuse
  The nature, types, and impacts of partner emotional abuse
  The relationship between childhood experiences of abuse and experiences of partner emotional abuse in adulthood
  The relationship between experiences of partner emotional abuse and other forms of domestic violence
  Life satisfaction and health status of persons who have recently experienced partner emotional abuse
  Controlling or trying to control a person from contacting family, friends or community
  Constantly insulting a person to make them feel ashamed, belittled or humiliated (e.g. put downs)
  Controlled or tried to control them from knowing, accessing or deciding about household money
  Threatening to take a person’s child/children away from them
An estimated one in four women (23% or 2.2 million) have experienced partner emotional abuse since the age of 15, including:
An estimated one in six men (16% or 1.4 million) have experienced partner emotional abuse since the age of 15, including:
Women were about as likely as men to experience emotional abuse by a current partner (6.1% compared with 5.2%) but were more likely to have experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner (18% compared with 12%).
  6.1% (575,400) by a current partner
  18% (1.7 million) by a previous partner
  5.2% (473,600) by a current partner
  12% (1 million) by a previous partner
This section discusses the socio demographic characteristics of persons who experienced partner emotional abuse in the 12 months prior to survey.
Compared with the average rate of partner emotional abuse for women (4.8%), those aged:
Compared with the average rate of partner emotional abuse for men (4.2%), those aged:
  30 to 44 years (6.7%) and 45 to 54 years (6.5%) were more likely to experience abuse
  65 years and over (2.2%) were less likely to experience abuse
  30 to 44 years (6.7%) were more likely to experience abuse
  65 years and over (*2.1%) were less likely to experience abuse
Women with disability or a long term health condition were more likely to experience partner emotional abuse (6.3%) than women without disability or a long term health condition (4.1%).
Men with disability or a long term health condition experienced partner emotional abuse at a similar rate (4.7%) to men without disability or a long term health condition (3.8%).
For both women and men with disability, those with intellectual or psychological disability were the most likely to experience partner emotional abuse (12% for women and 6.8% for men).
Women living in a one parent family with children under 15 years were more than twice as likely to experience partner emotional abuse (14%) compared with women in all other household types (ranging from 2.0% to 6.0%).
Men living in a one parent family with children under 15 and men living in a couple family with children under 15 were more likely to experience emotional abuse (9.2% and 6.4% respectively) compared with the national male rate (4.2%).
This section discusses the socio economic characteristics and experiences of financial stress of persons who experienced partner emotional abuse in the 12 months prior to survey.
For both women and men, the rate of partner emotional abuse was similar across labour force, education, and Socio Economic Index for Areas (SEIFA) variables.
Header 9: Household cash flow problems
Both women and men living in households which experienced cash flow problems in the previous 12 months were more than twice as likely as those who did not experience cash flow problems to experience partner emotional abuse.
Header 10: Household ability to raise $2000 within a week
Women living in households that were unable to raise $2000 within a week for something important were more likely to experience partner emotional abuse (7.6%) than women living in households that could raise the money (4.4%).
Rates of emotional abuse were similar for men living in households that could (4.2%) or could not (5.2%) raise $2000 within a week.
This section explores how emotional abuse was experienced within relationships, focusing on:
All characteristics in this section cover experiences of women and men since the age of 15. Details are obtained and analysed separately for emotional abuse by a current partner and/or the most recently emotionally abusive previous partner.
  the nature of the abuse, including the types of emotionally abusive behaviours used by perpetrators and the frequency of abuse
  the impacts of abuse, specifically, fear and anxiety experienced in response to the abuse
For this analysis, the emotional abuse behaviours have been classified into three broad types: controlling social behaviours, controlling financial behaviours and threatening or degrading behaviours. See the table below for classification of each behaviour.
Of the 575,400 women who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner:
Of the 473,000 men who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner:
Women were more likely than men to experience threatening or degrading behaviours (76% compared with 56%).
  76% experienced threatening or degrading behaviours
  41% experienced controlling financial behaviours
  56% experienced threatening or degrading behaviours
  42% experienced controlling social behaviours
Of the 1.7 million women who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner:
Of the 1 million men who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner:
Women were more likely than men to experience controlling social (63% compared with 54%) and controlling financial behaviours (61% compared with 48%).
  88% experienced threatening or degrading behaviours
  63% experienced controlling social behaviours
  83% experienced threatening or degrading behaviours
  54% experienced controlling social behaviours
Women experienced a higher average number of emotionally abusive behaviours than men, by both a current partner and previous partner.
Of women who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner:
Of men who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner:
Women were more likely than men to experience three or four behaviours (18% compared with *11%) and were less likely to experience one behaviour (45% compared with 57%).
  45% experienced one behaviour
  25% experienced two behaviours
  the average number of behaviours experienced was 2.5
  57% experienced one behaviour
  26% experienced two behaviours
  the average number of behaviours experienced was 2.1
Of women who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner:
Of men who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner:
Women were more likely than men to experience ten or more behaviours (20% compared with 8.7%) and were less likely to experience one behaviour (18% compared with 25%).
  20% experienced ten or more behaviours
  18% experienced one behaviour
  the average number of behaviours experienced was 5.6
  25% experienced one behaviour
  17% experienced two behaviours
  the average number of behaviours experienced was 4.2
Of women who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner, abuse was commonly experienced:
Of men who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner, abuse was commonly experienced:
Men were more likely than women to experience emotional abuse once only (34% compared with 15%).
  a little of the time (50%)
  some of the time (24%)
  a little of the time (45%)
  once only (34%)
Of women who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner, abuse was commonly experienced:
Of men who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner, abuse was commonly experienced:
Women were more likely than men to experience emotional abuse most of the time or all of the time (38% compared with 21%).
  some of the time (39%)
  most of the time or all of the time (38%)
  some of the time (44%)
  a little of the time (26%)
Women were more likely than men to experience anxiety or fear due to emotional abuse, either by a current partner or a previous partner.
  Of those who experienced emotional abuse by a current partner, 59% of women and 42% of men experienced anxiety or fear due to the abuse.
  Of those who experienced emotional abuse by a previous partner, 72% of women and 43% of men experienced anxiety or fear due to the abuse.
Women and men who experienced physical and/or sexual abuse before the age of 15 were around twice as likely as those who did not experience childhood abuse to experience partner emotional abuse as an adult.
When separated by type of childhood abuse (physical only, sexual only, both physical and sexual), women who experienced both physical and sexual abuse in childhood were the most likely to experience partner emotional abuse as an adult (57%).
Women and men who witnessed violence towards a parent by a partner before the age of 15 were around twice as likely than those who did not witness violence to experience partner emotional abuse as an adult.
Compared with women and men who have not experienced partner emotional abuse, those who have experienced partner emotional abuse were over 8 times more likely to have also experienced partner violence, either by the same emotionally abusive partner or a different partner.
For women:
For men:
  58% who experienced partner emotional abuse also experienced partner violence
  6.9% who did not experience partner emotional abuse (but have or had a partner) experienced partner violence
  26% who experienced partner emotional abuse also experienced partner violence
  3.0% who did not experience partner emotional abuse (but have or had a partner) experienced partner violence
When separated by type of partner violence (physical or sexual), the association was strongest for women who experienced emotional abuse and sexual violence by a partner.
Compared with women who had not experienced emotional abuse, women who experienced partner emotional abuse were about 16 times more likely to have also experienced partner sexual violence (19% compared with 1.2% who did not experience partner emotional abuse), either by the same emotionally abusive partner or a different partner.
This section compares the life satisfaction and health status of persons who experienced partner emotional abuse in the 12 months prior to survey with those who did not experience abuse.
Overall life satisfaction is a summary measure of self reported well being against a scale ranging from zero (not at all satisfied) to ten (completely satisfied). Life satisfaction ratings between 0 and 4 are categorised as low, ratings of 5 and 6 are categorised as moderate, and ratings between 7 and 10 are categorised as high.
Women and men who experienced partner emotional abuse were about twice as likely as those who did not experience partner emotional abuse to rate their overall life satisfaction as low or moderate.
Women who experienced partner emotional abuse were:
There were no notable differences in self assessed health status for men.
  more likely to assess their health as poor or fair (20%) than women who had not experienced partner emotional abuse (14%)
  less likely to rate health as very good or excellent (54%) than women who had not experienced partner emotional abuse (60%)
Header 28: Current partner
Header 28: Disability or long term health condition
Header 28: Emotional abuse
Header 28: Partner
Header 28: Prevalence
Header 28: Previous partner
Header 28: Violence
Header 28: Witness violence before the age of 15
A partner the person currently (at the time of the survey) lives with in a married or de facto relationship.
A disability or long term health condition exists if a limitation, restriction, impairment, disease or disorder has lasted, or is expected to last for six months or more, which restricts everyday activities.
Emotional abuse occurs when a person is subjected to certain behaviours or actions that are aimed at preventing or controlling their behaviour, causing them emotional harm or fear. These behaviours are characterised in nature by their intent to manipulate, control, isolate or intimidate the person they are aimed at. They are generally repeated behaviours and include psychological, social, financial, and verbal abuse.
For the PSS, a person was considered to have experienced emotional abuse where they reported they had been subjected to or experienced one or more of the following behaviours (that were repeated with the intent to prevent or control their behaviour and were intended to cause them emotional harm or fear):
The definition of emotional abuse excludes:
The term partner in the PSS is used to describe a person the respondent lives with, or lived with at some point in a married or de facto relationship. This may also be described as a co habiting partner.
Refers to the number and proportion (rate) of persons in a given population that have experienced any type of violence within a specified time frame – usually in the last 12 months (12 months prior to the survey) and since the age of 15.
A person that the respondent lived with at some point in a married or de facto relationship from whom the respondent is now separated, divorced or widowed from.
In the PSS, violence is defined as any incident involving the occurrence, attempt or threat of either sexual or physical assault. Violence can be broken down into two main categories, sexual violence and physical violence.
The PSS asks respondents if they ever saw or heard violence being directed at one parent by another before the age of 15. Violence in this context refers to physical assault only.
Mother includes step mothers and female guardians or care givers. Partner includes the respondent’s father/stepfather, and the mother’s boyfriend or same sex partner.
Father includes step fathers and male guardians or care givers. Partner includes the respondent’s mother/stepmother, and the father’s girlfriend or same sex partner.
  Controlled or tried to control them from contacting family, friends or community
  Controlled or tried to control them from using the telephone, internet or family car
  Controlled or tried to control where they went or who they saw
  Kept track of where they were and who they were with (e.g. monitoring social media, etc.)
  Controlled or tried to control them from knowing, accessing or deciding about household money
  Controlled or tried to control them from working or earning money
  Controlled or tried to control their income or assets
  Controlled or tried to control them from studying
  Deprived them of basic needs such as food, shelter, sleep or assistive aids
  Damaged, destroyed or stole any of their property
  Constantly insulted them to make them feel ashamed, belittled or humiliated (e.g. put downs)
  Shouted, yelled or verbally abused them to intimidate them
  Lied to their child/ren with the intent of turning them against them
  Lied to other family members or friends with the intent of turning them against them
  Threatened to take their child/ren away from them
  Threatened to harm their child/ren
  Threatened to harm their other family members or friends
  Threatened to harm any of their pets
  Harmed any of their pets
  Threatened or tried to commit suicide
  Cases of nagging (e.g. about spending too much money on fishing gear, or going out with friends) unless this nagging causes them emotional harm or fear.
  Cases where a spouse has restricted the respondent’s access to money, the car, or the internet as a result of the respondent’s substance abuse, gambling, or compulsive shopping issues unless the respondent perceives that these restrictions cause them emotional harm or fear.
25/08/2022
For consistency in terminology, the words ‘coercive control’ has removed from the ‘description’ and ‘about this release section’ of the publication.
