Date:
2020-06-30
Article Title:
 Gradual recovery in payroll jobs continues

Article Content:
Figures released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics today show total payroll jobs increased 1.0 per cent between mid May and mid June.
Head of Labour Statistics at the ABS, Bjorn Jarvis, said: “This continued the gradual recovery in payroll jobs since mid April (when total job losses were 8.8 per cent). However, payroll jobs are still 6.4 per cent below mid March, when Australia recorded its 100th confirmed case of COVID 19.”
“The recovery in payroll jobs between mid April and mid June represents around 30 per cent of the jobs initially lost,” Mr Jarvis said.
“Between mid May and mid June, the easing of restrictions saw payroll jobs increasing faster for the under 20s, up by 4.1 per cent.”
"Payroll jobs in the Accommodation and food services industry recovered by more than other impacted industries between mid May and mid June (3.8 per cent), but remained 28.6 per cent lower than in mid March."
“Western Australia (2.3 per cent) had the largest increases in jobs between mid May and mid June, and their total payroll job losses since mid March were also the lowest, at 4.4 per cent.”
Mr Jarvis added: “Looking at the week to week changes, payroll jobs showed no change in the week ending 13 June. This follows an increase of 0.2 per cent in the week ending 6 June.”
Further information is available in Weekly Payroll Jobs and Wages in Australia (cat. no. 6160.0.55.001).
The ABS would like to acknowledge the continued support from the Australian Taxation Office in enabling the ABS to produce these statistics, providing weekly insight into the Australian labour market.
  This release includes information on payroll jobs where a payment was made in the reference week through Single Touch Payroll enabled software and reported to the Australian Taxation Office.
  The additional ABS products being published to understand the economic impact of the coronavirus can be found on the .
  When reporting ABS data, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) must be attributed as the source.
  For media requests and interviews, contact the ABS Media Team on 1300 175 070 (8:30am   5:00pm Mon Fri)
