Date:
2020-09-03
Article Title:
 Imports of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)

Article Content:
Since April 2020 there has been a notable increase in the import of commodities containing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) including face masks, nitrile gloves, gowns and safety eye wear.
These increases have coincided with efforts by the Australian Government to boost the National Medical Stockpile with purchases of a range of medical supplies including PPE and the introduction of a new concessional item by the Australian Border Force to provide a free rate of customs duty for hygiene or medical products imported to treat, diagnose or prevent the spread of COVID 19, initially for the period of 1 February to 31 July 2020.
Figure 1 below includes imports of 13 commodities (see Appendix A for more information) identified as containing PPE. China was, and remains the main source of imports for these commodities.
Significant year on year increase have been seen in a number of commodities, but of particular note are:
Figure 2 below shows the change in these commodities from 2018 19 to 2019 20.
  “Made up textile articles” and “Made up non woven textile articles” which includes imports of face masks;
  “Gloves, mittens and mitts, of vulcanised rubber” which includes disposable nitrile gloves;
  “Garments, made up of fabrics of felt or of nonwovens, not impregnated or coated” and “Garments made up of felt or non woven fabrics” which includes imports of isolation and medical protective overalls; and
  “Non powered safety eyewear (incl. sporting goggles)” which includes face shields and safety goggles. 
Australia’s exports of commodities identified as containing PPE are relatively small when compared to imports, recording $10m in July 2020 which is $3m more than recorded in July 2019.
Commodities identified as containing PPE and an example of the items reported by importers under each.
For more information on international merchandise trade classifications, see  (cat.no 5489.0).
