Date:
2024-10-10
Article Title:
 Listing of psychosocial risk factor ICD-10 codes with inclusions and exclusions

Article Content:
This article contains a list of psychosocial codes from the International Classification of Disease 10th Revision (ICD 10) which have been used as the framework to identify and apply psychosocial risk factors to mortality coding. These codes have been taken from Chapter 21 Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact with Health Services of the ICD 10. It represents an update to the list that was previously published in the research paper . 
From 2017 the ABS has been including coded information on psychosocial risk factors to the National Mortality Dataset (NMD). Psychosocial risks are psychological, social and environmental factors which may adversely influence an individual's health status. Inclusion of psychosocial risk factors on the NMD enhanced the dataset as this information provides more insights into the complex interaction of the biological, psychological and psychosocial factors that may contribute to death.  
Information on psychosocial risk factors in the NMD are more commonly coded for coroner referred deaths and are sourced by the ABS mortality team from National Coronial Information System (NCIS). The NCIS is a medico legal database holding a range of information pertaining to each death, including reports from police, toxicologists, and pathologists as well as the coroner. These reports contain information not only on diseases, mental health conditions and external events and injury, but also a wealth of information on psychosocial factors as they relate to the deceased individual. These findings provide valuable insights into the circumstances and risk factors surrounding an individual’s death. At an aggregate level, this information can help guide prevention and intervention activities.
Psychosocial risk factors are less commonly coded for deaths certified by a doctor. This is because psychosocial factors are not systematically recorded on medical certificates of cause of death (MCCD) in Australia. Psychosocial risk factors for doctor certified deaths most commonly relate to medical care. 
The psychosocial risk factors recorded on the NMD are not a complete representation of psychological, social and environmental factors present for individual's at death. A psychosocial risk must be mentioned in either a coronial report or the MCCD and made available to the ABS for it to be coded and included in outputs. While there are still some data gaps, there has been improvement over time, both in information made available to the ABS and the coding process of the mortality team.
Psychosocial factors are usually assigned a code from Chapter 21 Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact with Health Services of the ICD 10. This article includes a list of the most commonly used codes from this chapter. The article also includes terms pertaining to psychosocial risk factors and what codes these terms are assigned to. The reason for this is that one ICD 10 code may have a number of terms included. This article is designed to assist with the interpretation of psychosocial risk factors in the NMD and as they appear in the Causes of Death, Australia publication. It is an updated to the list first published as part of the 2017 coding. This listing has also been updated to include psychosocial risk factors that may be reported on the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death for deaths certified by a doctor.
The table below presents the latest version of the listing of psychosocial risk factors as they relate to deaths in Australia. 
The codes listed reflect the definitions, inclusions and exclusions investigated at the completion of the cause of death coding of 2023 data. The risk factors listed are not representative of an exhaustive list of all circumstances surrounding external and natural deaths, rather they reflect what was identified as part of the coding process when analysing the MCCD and the reports on the NCIS. Coding undertaken by the ABS is undertaken at a point in time   this means that the codes reflect what was available at a certain point. As coronial investigations progress psychosocial risk factor codes may change, with updates being made as part of the ABS revisions process. 
  Column 1: Alphanumeric codeThis is a list of ICD 10 code blocks and individual codes (presented to four digit level), listed in alphanumeric order. 
  This is a list of ICD 10 code blocks and individual codes (presented to four digit level), listed in alphanumeric order. 
  Column 2: ICD 10 code descriptionThis contains the official ICD 10 code description.
  This contains the official ICD 10 code description.
  Column 3: ABS code descriptionThis contains the code description as applied by the ABS. The descriptions in this column  are used for reporting purposes. 
  This contains the code description as applied by the ABS. The descriptions in this column  are used for reporting purposes. 
  Column 4: Inclusion and exclusion terms (as applied by the ABS)This columns contains lists of psychosocial risk factors which are assigned to the code. When an inclusion term states "code with" this means that two codes are assigned to a term. This column also contains a list of exclusion terms that are coded elsewhere. 
  This columns contains lists of psychosocial risk factors which are assigned to the code. When an inclusion term states "code with" this means that two codes are assigned to a term. This column also contains a list of exclusion terms that are coded elsewhere. 
  Column 5: Additional commentsThis column provides comments that assist with interpretation of the code or terms as applied by the ABS. 
  This column provides comments that assist with interpretation of the code or terms as applied by the ABS. 
Risk factors are included and made available as associated causes in the NMD. Data on risk factors captured for intentional self harm deaths (suicide) is available in the  annual publication presented by characteristics such as age, sex and co occurring risk factors.
The ABS uses, and supports the use of the  on responsible, accurate and safe reporting on suicide, mental ill health and alcohol and other drugs. The ABS recommends referring to these guidelines when reporting on psychosocial risk factors.
The ABS continues to refine the coding of risk factors, including those which are psychosocial in nature. The future implementation of ICD 11 will also provide a more detailed framework for capture of psychosocial risk factors and may also enable capture of other types of risk factors.
