Date:
2019-08-29
Article Title:
 Outer suburbs have highest concentrations of children

Article Content:
Australia's outer suburbs were home to some of the highest concentrations of kids in the country in 2018, according to data released today by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS).
Children under 15 years of age made up less than a fifth of the population in Australia's capital cities, but in some suburbs the proportion of children rose to close to a third.
ABS Director of Demography Beidar Cho said the areas with the highest concentration of kids were generally located on the outskirts of our capitals, such as Bonner on the northern fringe of Canberra where children made up 32 per cent of the population, and Point Cook   South in outer Melbourne (31 per cent).
"In contrast, capital city areas with the largest proportions of people aged 15 to 64, the traditional working ages, were mostly inner cities. This reflects adults wanting to live near their places of work or study and includes Sydney   Haymarket   The Rocks (88 per cent), inner Adelaide (85 per cent) and Darwin City (85 per cent)," Ms Cho said.
Areas with the biggest concentrations of elderly Australians were more dispersed, including long established suburbs, retirement destinations and areas with aged care facilities. Brisbane's Bribie Island (41 per cent), Mandurah   South in Perth (28 per cent) and Lindisfarne   Rose Bay in Hobart (27 per cent) had some of the highest proportions of people aged 65 and over in the capitals.
To find out more about your area, see  (cat. no. 3235.0) available for download from the ABS website.
  Capital cities mentioned in this release are Greater Capital City Statistical Areas and areas are Statistical Areas Level 2, as defined in the  (cat. no. 1270.0.55.001).
  When reporting ABS data, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (or ABS) must be attributed as the source.
  For media requests and interviews, contact ABS Communications on 1300 175 070 (8.30am–5pm Canberra time Mon–Fri).
  Subscribe to our  and get media releases or products sent to you on release.
