Date:
2022-12-02
Article Title:
 Same-sex couples living together in Australia

Article Content:
  The 2021 Census counted 78,425 same sex couples living together in Australia.
  One in three of these same sex couples were married (30.0%).
  17.3% of these same sex couples had children living with them.
  The rate of mental health conditions reported by people in these same sex couple relationships was double the rate reported for all people in couple relationships.
  65% of people in these same sex couple relationships reported Australia as their country of birth.
Information on families has been collected since Australia’s first Census in 1911. Over Australia’s 18 censuses, the data available on families has expanded substantially and there are now over 20 family related variables. These variables allow users to analyse Australian families' characteristics. The Census is considered the most comprehensive dataset available as it includes every household in Australia. However, there are some limitations associated with families data from the Census that need to be considered:
The Census compiles information on same sex couples based on responses to the relationship and sex questions on the Census form. Counts of same sex couples living together in the same household have been compiled since the 1996 Census and are captured in the same sex couple indicator () variable.The Census provides a count of how many same sex couples live together and the characteristics of this population such as their age, marital status and cultural background. Because the 2021 Census did not include a question on sexual orientation, this article presents only information on people of the same sex who report being in a couple relationship. Data presented in this article cannot be used as a count for diverse sexualities or be seen to be representative of the whole lesbian, gay or bisexual populations. The  and  have both implemented and reported results using a sexual orientation question.
The data presented in this article is a snapshot of same sex couples living together in Australia. When looking at data presented in the commentary, comparisons can be drawn with all couples living together in Australia. It is important to note that same sex couples are included in the total couples population group. The all couples population group was identified as an appropriate comparator, as it allows us to compare like for like groups.
  The Census only measures relationships in each household and does not count those relationships which extend beyond the household. Therefore, couples who were not living together are not included in couple/family variables.
  Because the Census only measures relationships in households, parent/child relationships can be missed when children live across more than one household or are in shared care arrangements. More information on this can be found in .
  Counts of couples are obtained using responses to the relationship questions on the Census form, so the way people responded to these questions determines if they were recorded as a couple or not. Respondents' willingness to report their relationship status within the household can influence the data, and its possible this resulted in the underreporting of relationships.
  As the Census did not collect gender, variations of sex characteristics, or sexual orientation this article is not able to inform on the full range of relationships.
  Rules for family coding in the Census only allow the grouping of two individuals into a couple relationship.
The 2021 Census counted 78,425 same sex couples living together in Australia.
This represents a 67.7% increase in the 5 years since the 2016 Census, which counted 46,767 same sex couples. Furthermore, this is a 132.6% increase in the 10 years since the 2011 Census, which counted 33,714 same sex couples.
Same sex couples accounted for 1.4% of all couples living together in Australia in 2021, up from 0.9% in 2016.
The age distribution shows that for people in same sex couples, all age groups have increased in 2021. The most substantial increase was for people aged between 25 and 40 years.
The 2021 Census counted 153,779 people in same sex couple relationships living in the same household in Australia. The count of males and females in same sex couples was similar with 77,500 males reporting being in a same sex couple, and 76,300 females reporting a same sex couple.
The number of people counted as being in a same sex couple was less than twice the number of same sex couples counted. This is due to persons who were temporarily absent on Census Night in 2021. For more information see .
The median age for people in same sex couples living together was 40 years old in 2021, remaining consistent across the last three Census cycles. This median age was younger than the median age of all couples living together (49 years old).
When comparing males and females in same sex couples, females had a slightly younger age profile than males. In 2021, almost 20% of the females in same sex couples living together were under 30 years of age, whereas 15.5% of males in same sex couples were in this age cohort. Conversely, 23.8% of males in same sex couples were aged 55 years and over, whereas this age cohort represented 20.0% of females in same sex couples.
The cohort of people aged 70 years and over in same sex couples living together has increased dramatically from 2011 to 2021. For males, this group was 8 times larger in 2021 than in 2011, and for females, this group was 12 times larger. The majority (three out of five) of this 70 years and over group had moved from the 2011 60 69 years cohort due to aging. However, about two in five were increases due to people being counted in the Census in a same sex couple for the first time.
On 9 December 2017, the Marriage Act in Australia was changed to allow any two people the right to marry[1]. The 2021 Census was the first Census conducted following the amendment of the marriage law and therefore we were able to report registered same sex marriages for the first time. Since 2011, the Census has allowed same sex couples to report a relationship of husband/wife in the Relationship as reported for couples () variable.
According to the ABS Marriages and Divorces publication, 2020 saw the annual rate of marriages for the total population decrease by 30.8%[2]. This was the largest decrease ever observed by the ABS and was likely driven by COVID 19 restrictions on weddings that capped the number of guests and enforced social distancing[2]. Despite these restrictions, the 2021 Census observed one in three same sex couples were married (30.0%). This was substantial given the Marriage Act amendments only came into effect four years before the Census.
Females in same sex couples were more likely to be married than males in same sex couples, with nearly one third of females (32.2%) reporting being married at the time of the 2021 Census. Around one quarter (27.7%) of males in same sex couples reported being married. Nearly four out of five (79.9%) people in all couples reported being married.
The location of same sex couples living together over time was similar to the distribution of all couples living together. New South Wales (NSW) and Victoria (Vic) both accounted for a larger proportion of same sex couples living together. In 2011, 37.8% of same sex couples lived in NSW compared to 31.8% of the population overall. Since 2011 the number of same sex couples in all jurisdictions has increased, but NSW has grown at a slower rate than other jurisdictions leading to the proportion of all same sex couples living in NSW to decline from 37.8% to 34.2%.
Same sex couples were most likely to live in capital cities compared to the rest of each state. Male couples were more likely to live in capital cities than female couples, except for Tasmania (Tas), where the pattern is reversed.
Family structures can be complex, dynamic and difficult to capture. Despite the Census being the most comprehensive collection of family information in Australia, it is important to note that there were limitations with how this information was gathered and these need to be considered when interpreting the data. Data collected in the Census was based on one point in time and does not take into consideration the wide variety of living arrangements that exist. This is particularly true for children living across multiple households, or in shared care arrangements. Children can only be captured in one household on Census Night.
In 2021, 17.3% of the 78,425 same sex couples living together in the 2021 Census were couples with children, an increase from 14.8% in 2016.
Female same sex couples were more likely to have children (27.7%) compared to male same sex couples (7.0%).
Like the total number of same sex couples counted in the Census, the number of same sex couples with children increased significantly in 2021. Male same sex couples with children grew by 1,700 or 161% and female same sex couple families increased by 4,900 or 84% since 2016. The number of all couples with children also increased in 2021, growing by 214,362 or 7.9% since 2016.
Four out of five (80%) same sex couples with children had children under 15 years of age compared to 69% of all couples.
Nearly half of all same sex couples with children had only one child (47.4%). This was more common than same sex couple families having two children (36.7%). When looking at all couples with children it was more common to have two children in the family (43.2%) than to have one child (36.2%).
The proportion of couple families living together with four or more children is almost equal for both same sex and all couple families with children in the home.
The following sections focus on the individual characteristics of people in couple relationships. Long term health conditions, cultural diversity, and employment related data are all individual characteristics and are reported at the person level, rather than about the couple. Person characteristics help to define this population group and better understand the context in which these individuals live.
Most long term health conditions (aside from mental health and asthma) were highly correlated with older age[3], so it was not surprising to see lower rates of long term health conditions for people in same sex couples living together when compared to all people in couple relationships, given the younger age profile of people in same sex couples. The rate of mental health conditions reported by people in same sex couples (16%) was significantly higher, at double the rate reported for the total population of all people in a couple relationship (8.2%).
Females in couple relationships reported higher rates of mental health conditions when compared with males in the same age group, up until 70 years and over. This is consistent with findings published from the [4]. The highest rate of reported mental health conditions for all couples was for those aged 15 19 years. People in same sex couples reported substantially higher rates of mental health conditions in all age cohorts before 75 years of age. This is also supported by recent data published from the [5]. Following the 70 74 years age range, the reported rate of mental health conditions was similar across same sex couples and all couples living together.
64.8% of people in same sex couple relationships living together reported Australia as their country of birth in the 2021 Census. This was higher than the 60.8% reported by all couples living together. 68.3% of females in same sex couples reported being born in Australia, compared with 60.7% of males in same sex couples.
41.3% of people in same sex couples who were born overseas arrived in Australia in the last 10 years before the 2021 Census. For total couples, this was significantly less, with 27.6% of all overseas born people arriving since 2011.
The top 10 countries of birth for individuals in same sex couples was similar to the total population of all couples living together, except those born in India. The proportion of people in same sex couples born in India is substantially lower than the total couple proportion. The United States of America appears in the top 10 countries of birth for people in same sex couples, but is lower (position 18) for people in all couples.
People in same sex couples were less likely to use a language other than English at home (18.4%) compared with all couples (25.4%). The most common language other than English used at home by all couples was Mandarin. The reported rate of people who used Mandarin at home was 3.8% for same sex couples, slightly higher than all couples (3.0%).
In 2016, 57.4% of individuals in same sex couples reported no religion and 32.5% reported a religious affiliation with Christianity. In 2021, 63.9% of people in same sex couples reported having no religion which was significantly higher than the reported rate by people in all couple relationships (37.6%). The rate of people in same sex couples identifying with Christianity decreased to 26.9% in 2021.
Across all age groups, people in same sex couples were more likely to report no religion than people in all couples. Three quarters of people in same sex couples living together aged 15 24 years reported no religious affiliation. The trend of reporting no religion decreased as age increased, this was also the case for all couples. More than half of people in same sex couples reported no religion for each age group until the 65 74 year age group when 48.3% had no religion. 
Engagement in employment for same sex couples living together was 80.0%, which was substantially higher than all couples living together (66.9%). This was related to the younger age profile of people in same sex couples. This is further supported by comparing the proportion of people in all couples living together who reported not being in the labour force (30.3%) with people in same sex couples who also reported not being in the labour force (16.6%). Although there are a variety of reasons why people report not being in the labour force, the most common reason is retirement.
The top 10 occupations for females in same sex couples were similar to the top 10 occupations for females in all couples. Registered nurses was the most common occupation for all females in the 2021 Census. Police, chefs and welfare support workers were notably more common for females in same sex couples, compared with females in all couples.
The occupations of retail manager, sales assistant, software programmer and advertising manager were in the top 10 for both males in same sex couples and males in all couples. Registered nurses, general clerks, advertising professionals, and aged and disabled carers were notably more common for males in same sex couples compared with males in all couples.
There are similarities with the top ten occupations reported for males and females in same sex couples. Registered nurses and aged and disabled carers ranked highly across both groups, as did retail managers and sales assistants. The top occupations for males in same sex couples was more sales and management focused whereas females in same sex couples had more health, education and service delivery roles.
This article has been externally peer reviewed by the following representatives and organisations:
The ABS greatly values the knowledge, expertise and contributions of these reviewers and thanks them for their time and input.
  James Zanotto, LGBTIQ+ Health Australia
  Justine Field, Rainbow Families
  Lucy Watson, ACON
  Mary Lou Rasmussen, School of Sociology, Australian National University
  Nicky Bath, LGBTIQ+ Health Australia
  Todd Fernando, LGBTIQ+ Commissioner, Victoria
  Attorney General’s Department, ‘Marriage equality in Australia’, , last viewed 29 November 2022
  Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Marriages and Divorces, Australia’, , last viewed 28 November 2022
  Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Long term health conditions’, , last viewed 28 November 2022
  Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Health Conditions Prevalence, 2020 21’, , last viewed 28 November 2022
  Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘National Study of Mental Health and Wellbeing’, , last viewed 28 November 2022
5/4/2024   Table   Same sex couples by state and territory, 2021: The count and proportion (%) data in the column labelled “2021 total all couples” was corrected to reflect total couples instead of total Australian population.
